debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 36 
Tuesday , February 10 , 1997 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Late Honourable Guy Charbonneau 
tributes 
the Late Honourable Gerald R . Ottenheimer , Q . C . 
tributes 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
olympic Winter Games 
opening of 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nations Against Iraq - State of Readiness of Troops and Mat é riel 
health 
dedication of Medical Profession - Tributes 
the Late J . B . Salsberg 
tributes 
business of the Senate 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
cardinal Ambrozic 
conveyance of Felicitations of Senate on Appointment of His Eminence - Notice of Motion 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Examine Governance Provisions of Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
veterans Affairs Subcommittee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nationals against Iraq - Chain of Command on Disposition of Troops and Mat é riel - Request for Debate 
solicitor General 
activities of Organized Crime - Money Laundering in New Brunswick - Government Position 
the Economy 
strengthening of Economy of New Brunswick - Comments of Solicitor General - Request for Particulars 
justice 
young Offenders Act - Request for Changes by Province of Saskatchewan - Government Position 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nations against Iraq - Assessment of Risk of Humanitarian Disaster from Bombing Strikes on Specific Targets - Government Position 
national Finance 
proposed Merger of Royal Bank and Bank of Montreal - Government Position 
science , Research and Development 
cuts to Funding of Medical Research - Government Position 
revenue Canada 
possible Postponement of Income Tax Deadline Dates for Victims of Ice Storm - Government Position 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
justice 
investigation Into Sale of Airbus Aircraft to Air Canada - Status of Letter to Swiss Authorities - Government Position 
forestry 
private Wood - Lots in Maritime Provinces - Task Force Recommendations - Government Position 
justice 
investigation into Sale of Airbus Aircraft to Air Canada - Officials Responsible for Wording in Letter to Swiss Authorities - Government Position 
the Environment 
identification and Documentation of Federal Contaminated Sites - Government Position 
immigration 
estimate of Overall Costs of Processing Refugees - Timetable for Presentation to Parliament - Government Position 
monitoring of Progress of Refugee Claims - Government Policy 
solicitor General 
community Services for Offenders - Eligibility of Non - violent Criminals - Request for Clarification 
canada - United States Relations 
implementation of Law Requiring Visas for Canadians to Enter United States - Possibility of Exemption - Government Position 
national Defence 
search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program - Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase - Government Position 
federal Provincial Relations 
immigration 
efficacy of Tracking System on Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Relations 
reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
immigration 
tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants - Government Position 
detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants - Request for Particulars 
fisheries and Oceans 
negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment - Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Relations 
reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers - Government Position 
human Rights 
united Nations Committees - Possible Change in Government Policies - Government Position 
human Rights 
APEC Summit - Domination by Trade and Economic Issues - Government Position 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development 
agreement on International Humane Trapping Standards - Provision for Industrial Adjustment Program - Government Position 
national Defence 
Manitoba - SOWIND Air Crash at Little Grand Rapids - Response of Rescue Team - Availability of Necessary Equipment - Request for Departmental Statement 
federal - Provincial Relations 
Quebec - Proportion of Taxes Raised Controlled by Province - Request for Particulars 
the Environment 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Commitment Made at Kyoto Conference - Consultations Between Prime Minister and Provincial Premiers on Ratification - Government Position 
transport 
further Imposition of Tolls on Trans - Canada Highway 
solicitor General 
publication on Internet of Hate Propaganda and Child Pornography - Public Consultations - Request for Information 
minister ' s Report and Annual Statement on Organized Crime - Seniors Victims of Telemarketing Fraud - Request for Clarification 
the Environment 
reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Ratification of Undertakings made at Kyoto - Commitment Related to Position of United States - Government Position 
treasury Board 
millennium Computer Phenomenon - Effect on Government Computers - Government Position 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Possibility of Subsidies for Building Spu Pipelines to Additional Areas of the maritime Provinces - Government Position 
fisheries 
bay of Fundy - Destruction of Infected Salmon on Fish Farms - Progress in Establishing Recovery Program for Growers - Government Position 
health 
request for Funding to Develop Vaccine for Flesh - east Disease - Government Position 
fisheries 
bay of Fundy - Destruction of Infected Salmon on Fish Farms - Arrangements for Control of Outbreak - Government Position 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Possible Extension into New Brunswick and Quebec - Government Position 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
transport - Pearson Airport - Ex Gratia Payment to Goudge S 
energy - Department of Asia - Pacific - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Business Development Bank of Canada - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Canada Post - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Correctional Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of Foreign Affairs - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of Human Resources Development - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of Latin America and Africa - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Royal Canadian Mounted Police - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - National Museum of Science and Technology - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of the Solicitor General - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of Children and Youth - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of National Defence - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
national Defence - Equipment to be Mothballed or Scrapped 
national Defence - Canadian Forces Aircrew Personnel Shortfalls 
national Defence - Surplus Artillery Ammunition Transferred to Turkey 
energy - Restrictions to the Transportation of plutonium and MOX fuel 
orders OF THE DAY 
excise Tax Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
reports on Social and Economic Development 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , February 10 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Late Honourable Guy Charbonneau 
tributes 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is with great sorrow that I learned of Guy Charbonneau ' s death last month . 
although aware of the seriousness of his illness , which had affected him for many months , and of the deterioration that had set in the month before , his death came as a shock nonetheless . 
i knew Guy for over 20 years and held him in high regard from the beginning . 
indeed , I am proud to have been a friend of his . 
our former colleague Guy Charbonneau had many qualities , not the least of which were courage and perseverance . 
it was courage that found him serving with Les Fusiliers Mont - Royal in Europe during World War II. 
it was perseverance that was largely responsible for the victory of his political party in 1984 , a party he served tirelessly for 40 years . 
he was also an educated man , whose great courtesy and modesty served this house so well during his nine years as Speaker , whether in the house , or on official visits abroad . 
the late Senator Charbonneau ' s conduct during the GST debate in the fall of 1990 led to extreme reactions in the Senate , including verbal and even physical abuse , which brought disgrace to this institution and certainly little honour on those who behaved so reprehensibly . 
passions ran high during that period , and no doubt many would not want to be reminded of it today . 
it was a period when the Speaker ' s mettle was put to the test , and Guy Charbonneau met that test with calm and poise , with courage and perseverance . 
it was one of his finest hours as he protected the traditions of the chair from those who were ready to violate them for petty political advantage . 
there was a time , honourable senators , when it was an accusation to say , " He was a friend of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney , " with the hope that the calumny unjustly heaped upon one man would soil the record of another . 
how surely we share the blame for the excesses of those times and the responsibility for the pain that followed . 
does it not remind us that the Speaker of this chamber is provided with no shields to ward off the temper of an agitated house ? 
the Speaker remains silent while the rest of us can make statements that can be appropriately defensive . 
the Speaker remains silent while the rest of us can ask questions when we see or hear unfairness unmasked . 
our Speakers are equipped to defend every senator but themselves . 
who would have thought that Guy Charbonneau would need anyone ' s help ? 
after receiving his Bachelor of Arts from the University of Montreal , he was commissioned in 1942 and served with Les Fusiliers Mont - Royal until 1944 . 
he was promoted to captain in 1944 and named Air Liaison Officer with the French Wing of the Allied Tactical Air Forces in northwest Europe . 
he received the B ' nai Brith Canadian Award of Merit in 1986 , the Grand Croix , Ordre de la Pl é iade in 1991 , and was Commander , Military and Hospitaler Order of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem . 
called to the Senate by Prime Minister Joe Clark in 1979 , he served on four Senate committees until he was named Speaker by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney . 
as Speaker , he also chaired the Internal Economy Committee . 
i will conclude with a quotation from Longfellow which former prime minister Mulroney quoted at the memorial service for Senator Charbonneau : 
the heights by great men reached and kept , 
were not attained by sudden flight ; 
but they , while their companions slept , 
were toiling upward in the night . 
honourable senators , to his wife , Yolande , to his two sons and to his entire family , I offer my deepest sympathy . 
may Guy Charbonneau rest in the peace he so richly deserved . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , on September 30 last , in this chamber , I paid tribute to Senator Guy Charbonneau on the occasion of his retirement from this place . 
today , such a short time later , we honour our recently deceased colleague , in fact , our longest serving speaker , who had so bravely endured a lengthy illness to the end . 
such courage was much in evidence throughout his life and was no surprise for those who knew of the great distinction with which he served as captain of the proud regiment , Les Fusiliers Mont - Royal , during active service in World War II. 
this was a courage which was a special kind of hallmark for Guy Charbonneau . 
during the 18 years he sat in this chamber , Guy Charbonneau held to his convictions , did not waver in his loyalty , and remained faithful to his party and his country . 
at the very moving memorial to our departed colleague , which I attended only a short time ago in Montreal , the deep feelings he inspired among his friends were very much in evidence , particularly during the eulogy which was given by former prime minister Brian Mulroney . 
a soldier and a gentleman to the end , Guy Charbonneau will always be remembered as a committed , unswerving patriot with a brave and passionate heart . 
to his family , we extend our deepest sympathy . 
hon. Normand Grimard : 
honourable senators , Senator Charbonneau , who died on January 18 , was Speaker of the Senate for the nine years the Conservative government was in office , after having succeeded in the business world through sheer tenacity . 
he was also a dominant figure in the Conservative Party in Quebec City for almost three lean decades . 
our party could not recruit even 600 members in all of Abitibi , Rouyn - Noranda and T é miscamingue . 
as I did on September 30 , 1997 , when the distinguished senator retired from this chamber , already feeling the effects of his terrible illness , I will again point out that my good friend Guy left this world with the satisfaction of an obligation fulfilled in many areas : in his personal and professional life , in business as in politics , and through the constant support he provided to his friends and his family , in particular his wife Yolande , to whom my wife Dolly and I send our special wishes . 
i truly regret that Senator Charbonneau ' s illness prevented him from enjoying the happy retirement wished on each parliamentarian who retires from his duties in this chamber . 
his retirement was so short as to barely have existed . 
god had other plans for him . 
if we were to look for some general phrase to sum up Senator Charbonneau ' s life , I think he would approve of the words spoken by Don Rodrigue in Corneille ' s play Le Cid : 
i would do it all over again if I had to . 
we extend our deepest sympathies to those Senator Charbonneau left behind . 
a wonderful husband , a great parliamentarian and a noble - hearted man - we have lost them all . 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , I was especially saddened by the news of the death of our former colleague the Honourable Guy Charbonneau . 
i shall always remember the first time I met Senator Charbonneau in 1976 . 
it was at the Conservative Party leadership convention where we both worked as volunteers . 
at that time , I was struck by how quietly unassuming he was as he went about his tasks . 
i quickly realized that he was a man who did his job as efficiently as he could without making a big fuss about it . 
during that convention I also learned that Senator Charbonneau had a deep commitment to the political process and to the importance of providing Quebecers with a federal alternative to the Liberal Party . 
when I was named to the Senate , along with Senator Staff Barootes and Senator Finlay MacDonald - we three were appointed on the same day in 1984 - my friendship with Senator Charbonneau was renewed . 
he helped me at a time when I felt out of place and unsure of myself , as I suppose all new senators feel . 
his support and his kindness during those early and also very busy years was important to me . 
through his guidance and his gentle encouragement I soon developed a comfort level with this institution which he continued to enrich until his illness a few years ago . 
i shall miss Senator Charbonneau , but shall always be grateful for the friendship which he wilfully gave . 
i join with my colleagues in expressing to Yolande and his family my deepest sympathy at this time . 
hon. Fernand Roberge : 
he acted as Air Liaison Officer with the Allied Tactical Air Forces in northwest Europe . 
until he became too ill to continue , he was honourary colonel of his regiment . 
guy was a pillar of the Progressive Conservative Party for 50 years . 
i had the privilege of making his acquaintance at the 1976 leadership convention . 
over the following years we worked together , our efforts culminating in Brian Mulroney ' s successful bid for the leadership of our party in 1983 . 
the Prime Minister acknowledged his great competency by appointing him Speaker of the Senate from 1984 to 1993 . His wife Yolande was the soul of generosity and courage right up to the end , and our prayers are with her in these difficult days . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , if I may , I would like to add my words to the tributes to Senator Charbonneau by my colleagues on the other side of this house . 
i do so because I had the great privilege of having been his successor as the senator for Kennebec , as well as having had the pleasure of his acquaintance for a great many years . 
i would like to pay tribute to his great civility , his great discretion , and in particular to his generous spirit . 
those of us who have been in politics long enough to have had long service within a party know how much courage , generosity and conviction are needed to get through the dark days as well as the bright ones . 
if there is one quality we can particularly associate with Senator Charbonneau , it is his vision that there are periods of grace among the day to day difficulties . 
his portrait in the Speakers ' Gallery attests to that . 
you will have seen , as I have , the determination in his eyes . 
you will have seen that his pose matches the determination he put into meeting all the objectives he set for his life : belief in a united country , family life despite the heavy demands of his political life , and finally the determination that one may , once the daily toils are over , take a well - deserved rest in the twilight of life with the assurance of a job well done . 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I rise today to honour the memory of a friend and colleague , the Honourable Guy Charbonneau , who passed away just over a month ago . 
colleagues in this place are rightfully paying tribute to his very full life and his contribution to his beloved Canada . 
i speak of the human being and how events must surely have made their mark on him . 
no one can deny his loyalty to his country and to his political party . 
i first met him over 30 years ago . 
at the time , being a Progressive Conservative from Quebec was an act of utmost faith and loyalty . 
he was always the optimist and never gave up on our struggle to make our party a truly pan - Canadian one . 
it is to be celebrated that he lived long enough to see this happen . 
like anyone involved in politics , he had his detractors . 
why , even after his death , a Globe and Mail journalist wrote a tasteless dissertation comparing the events of his death to an event in Toronto involving former prime minister Trudeau and the launch of the English version of Cit é Libre . 
i felt that since these two Canadians were the subject of his comparison in The Globe and Mail , perhaps he should have completed the picture . 
both were young French Canadians at the outbreak of World War II. 
one chose to join other Canadians and fight Nazi oppression and to fight for freedom . 
the other , as is well known , chose not to do so . 
upon his death , I reflected on a conversation I had with Guy Charbonneau in late 1990 . 
i was then left to wonder whether , when Guy Charbonneau fought for Canada and for our freedom , including freedom of speech , he ever thought that he would be in this Parliament and have words spoken to him such as , quoting directly from Debates of the Senate back then : 
Mr. Charbonneau is no longer morally our Speaker . 
when he opens his mouth , we will not hear what he says . 
when he decides something , we will not want to know about it . 
when he enters the Senate , we will not see him . 
if he sits again on the Chair , we will only see an empty chair . 
i am sorry to say that Speaker Charbonneau has ceased to exit . 
he is a ghost . 
it is a pity that the person who uttered those words has chosen not to be here at this precise moment . 
or : 
you have been prostituted by two men : 
Lowell Murray sitting there , and Brian Mulroney . 
you , Guy , who have had a distinguished military career , a distinguished business career , have been destroyed in this House by those two individuals . 
i wonder if the thought crossed his mind , as fists were shaken in his face and this place collapsed in a cacophony of whistles and kazoos , that this scene before him did little to dignify all for which he had fought . 
seven and a half years later , most thinking people , and according to surveys , a large majority of Canadians , regret the loss of the Meech Lake Accord , and - what do you know - we still have the GST . 
throughout all of this , Guy Charbonneau maintained his gentlemanly dignity , but his concerns are as valid today as they were then . 
to his wife Yolande , his children and their families , you have my deepest sympathy . 
you have lost a loved one , but you have much to look back on with great pride . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , our colleague Senator Guy Charbonneau passed away in January barely a few months after retiring from the Senate . 
he was in the military in the Second World War and afterward went into business , most successfully . 
i came to know him after my appointment to the Senate in September 1988 . 
the years that followed were turbulent . 
between Christmas and New Year ' s Day , following the 1988 general election , Canada signed the free trade agreement , which came into force on January 1 , 1989 . 
then came the famous debate on the GST , which caused a lot of ruckus . 
speaker Guy Charbonneau kept the ship afloat with courage and determination . 
historians will assess this period of our history . 
he was awarded the Ordre de la Pl é iade in 1991 , among the many other honours he received . 
the death of Senator Guy Charbonneau distresses us all , and I would offer my deepest sympathy to his wife , Yolande , and his family . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I would , very briefly , like to pay tribute to my longtime friend Guy Charbonneau . 
i want to offer my most sincere condolences to his wife . 
i paid final tribute when I attended his funeral service in Montreal along with a number of our colleagues , including you , Mr. Speaker , and the leader of the government . 
i will not repeat what has already been said . 
i will let history judge the unfortunate events in the Senate . 
however , as the Right Honourable Brian Mulroney put it in his tribute at the funeral , Quebec has lost a loving son and Canada , a loyal patriot . 
this is what I want to remember of Guy Charbonneau , and I want it clearly noted . 
the Late Honourable Gerald R . Ottenheimer , Q . C . 
tributes 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , the St. John ' s Evening Telegram , in a warm and knowing tribute to our late friend and colleague Gerald Ryan Ottenheimer , noted that he died of cancer at the young age of 63 . 
yes , young indeed . 
well into middle age , he carried with him the sparkle and enthusiasm of a newly - minted president of a junior chamber of commerce ; a man whose enthusiasms and excitements buoyed the spirits of others with him in this place , where sobriety is not the only valued ingredient of second thought . 
the Evening Telegram described that period when Premier Joey Smallwood " was at his most dictatorial " as a " rough introduction to politics for the urbane , civilized Ottenheimer , a man who even his opponents admired for his unfailing good manners . " 
senator Ottenheimer ' s good manners were on display repeatedly in this chamber as in his splendid contribution to the debate on Term 17 of the Terms of Union of Newfoundland in June of 1996 . 
it was a matter on which Senator Ottenheimer had firm convictions . 
still , he found it necessary to allow for the differences of opinion of others , or the possibilities of misunderstandings of what the Newfoundland government was hoping to do with its campaign to eliminate minority rights . 
again and again , Senator Ottenheimer made his own position clear ; there could be no doubt about that . 
he said : 
it is important that the people of Canada know what effect such a precedent might have . 
however , I do not accept that that can be the sole criterion . 
even if it is established - and I do not think it can be established without reasonable doubt - that one can alter the rights of minorities in Newfoundland without their consent without affecting the rights of anyone else as expressed in the Constitution , can that be the criterion of saying the rights of minorities in Newfoundland are less valuable and less protected than the rights of minorities elsewhere ? 
honourable senators , that speech fills most of five pages in the record of the Debates of the Senate , and reflects on the wisdom and experience of a man who had served 16 years and held two portfolios in the Government of Newfoundland . 
to anyone concerned with the role that the Senate plays in the national dialogue , a re - reading of the words of our Speaker pro tempore on that day could be time well invested . 
to his wife Alma , his children and the family , I offer deepest sympathy , with the hope that they will find some consolation in the knowledge that their grief is shared by many who were fortunate not only to know Senator Ottenheimer but to profit from a privileged association . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Ottenheimer was educated in Rome , Paris , London and New York . 
his love , passion and facility for languages was renowned . 
in spite of his very deep understanding of the global community , his heart and soul belonged to his beloved Newfoundland and , indeed , to Memorial University . 
it was in that wonderful province , a place where European seamen of Basque , Norman and Portuguese descent were fishing in the ice and fog on the Banks a century and a half before the arrival of Cabot , with the Viking presence many centuries before that , that this civilized man of unfailing diplomacy and mannerliness made his home . 
it was in that same wonderful province where the young Gerald Ottenheimer first locked horns with the late Joey Smallwood , one of Canada ' s most colourful Fathers of Confederation . 
the Leader of the Opposition referred to the fact that Senator Ottenheimer was leader of what was then referred to as the " Gang of Three " - Tories to a person , of whom it was said that they could really meet in a phone booth . 
this famous line of his may have to suffice for now : 
i am King of my own little land , and that ' s all I have ever wanted to be . 
honourable senators , there are no nuances in that . 
it took a steel will , great courage and strength of character to force a return to two party politics in that province at a time when , as someone said , " only small game laws protected opposition members in the House of Assembly . " 
without the late Gerry Ottenheimer ' s good work , it has been further said that this may never have happened . 
during his 16 - year tenure in Newfoundland ' s House of Assembly , Senator Ottenheimer served as House Leader , as Minister of Justice and as Minister of Energy . 
he brought his fair - mindedness and enthusiasm to the Canadian Senate upon his appointment here in 1988 . 
in his final days with us as Speaker pro tempore , Senator Ottenheimer continued to serve as the fair and gentle patriot who rarely let partisanship interfere with his duties . 
as an active participant in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association , he worked hard to keep the process of democratization alive across the globe . 
he and I had many discussions about that . 
he worked hard to keep the dream alive ; the dream and the determination to build a better world . 
he worked hard to inspire the conviction and belief which sustains men and women in the struggle for freedom and human rights . 
he met with and helped advise the many parliamentarians who were setting up democratic institutions in civilian societies across the planet . 
Macaulay once said that the highest intellects , like the tops of the mountains , are the first to catch and to reflect the dawn . 
we were all privileged to serve with Gerry Ottenheimer because he brought much life , urbanity and wisdom to this place . 
however , he was a parliamentary gentleman whose heart remained - unequivocally and always - with the descendants of Europe ' s boldest seamen and fishers : the proud people of Newfoundland . 
to his family , we extend our deepest sympathy . 
hon. C . William Doody : 
honourable senators , I rise with a great deal of sorrow to add a few words to the tributes being paid to our late colleague Gerald Ottenheimer . 
i have known Gerry Ottenheimer for most of my life . 
he was so far ahead of me intellectually , scholastically and in political astuteness , kindness and generosity that it is hard to imagine a better friend and a finer man . 
his academic career was quite remarkable . 
the preceding speakers have mentioned some of his accomplishment in this area . 
he went to Fordham University in New York ; to Memorial Univeristy in St. John ' s ; to the University of Paris , the University of Rome , and Cambridge in the United Kingdom , where he obtained his master ' s degree in law . 
he had an amazing talent for languages , an ability to pick up languages that was quite extraordinary . 
i used to watch him with amazement in the House of Assembly in Newfoundland , taking notes as he listened to speeches from the other side . 
he would take his notes in Greek . 
it was certainly secure , no question about it . 
he also spoke Russian . 
early on , he decided that his vocation was to be politics - or , perhaps more precisely , public service . 
he was first elected to the Newfoundland House of Assembly in 1966 and was re - elected in each subsequent provincial election until 1985 , when he was called to this place . 
as others have mentioned , he served in a number of cabinet positions and served with great distinction as the Speaker of the Newfoundland House of Assembly . 
when Gerry began his political life , before he was first elected , and afterwards , he brought the PC Party to rural Newfoundland for perhaps the first time since Confederation . 
he prepared the way for the Moores and Peckford administrations which subsequently won election . 
Gerry was a pioneer . 
it was a long and lonely road out in rural Newfoundland in those days . 
the cheering throngs of PCs were difficult to find . 
as a matter of fact , they were non - existent . 
he persevered and pressed on with tremendous tenacity , and the results demonstrated themselves . 
Gerry was a man of tremendous accomplishments and talents but , above all , he was a modest man . 
one would be hard pressed , from speaking with him or listening to his conversations , to imagine that he had accomplished so much . 
i can never remember Gerry saying , " When I was at the University of Paris , " or , " When I was at Cambridge . " 
he was far more likely to tell you about a nomination meeting in St. Mary ' s Bay when he was introduced as " Gerry Ockentimer . " 
Ottenheimer is not a name that is easy to pronounce in some of the Irish communities like St. Mary ' s Bay . 
nevertheless , they nominated him , acclaimed him , elected him , and loved him because he was a man among men - and a gentleman above all . 
i was proud to have known him . 
i shall certainly miss him . 
i think we will all miss him . 
i offer my sincere condolences and sympathy to Alma , to his four daughters , to his brother , John , who now serves in the House of Assembly , to his son - in - law , who is currently the PC Party leader in Newfoundland , to all his family , and to his countless friends . 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I also want to remember Gerry Ottenheimer . 
there is a line in a song by Joni Mitchell that you may recall : 
you don ' t know what you ' ve got ' til it ' s gone . 
at the commemorative service in St. John ' s it occurred to me that I wished I had got to know Gerry Ottenheimer a lot better . 
as Senator Doody says , he served in a number of cabinet positions , and in the opposition when it was at a low ebb in St. John ' s . 
however , there was a time when the Tory Party was not at a low ebb . 
one of those times was during the Peckford days . 
i think Senator Doody will agree that relations between the Peckford government in St. John ' s and the Trudeau government in Ottawa were perhaps frosty , to understate it . 
perhaps that was the difficulty that accounts for the fact that I did not get to know Gerry better . 
i wish I had . 
i did get to know him better through that commemorative service . 
i got to know him from his wife and his daughters , who have all gone on to have exceptional careers . 
one is doing a Ph . D . in sociology and will be teaching at Memorial University . 
he treasured his daughters and his family . 
he treasured his books . 
his wife told me that he would be careful with each one of them . 
he was a learned man who had a love of learning and books . 
he treasured his roots . 
he was connected with the Ryan family , a historic family of merchants in our province , who lived in Trinity , the historic fishing community . 
he treasured those roots . 
he had a cottage on the sea , on Trinity Bay , which he loved to visit . 
Charlie said they would sit up into the night talking about very deep , thoughtful and philosophical questions . 
i also heard about him from his priest , Father Molloy , who also happened to be a good friend of his . 
Gerry Ottenheimer was a man of faith , a practising Catholic , who went to church regularly when he could in St. John ' s . 
right up to the end , he was in touch with his church , in touch with his priest . 
father Molloy told us that Gerry had made peace with himself and with his maker , and that he was perfectly content to leave the life that he had had , a life of great respect , a life of service , a life of work for other people . 
as a Newfoundlander , I wish to add my voice to Bill Doody ' s to say that we were proud of him . 
he was a dedicated politician . 
he was Speaker pro tempore of this place and he was known internationally . 
i should like to offer him some lines from Stan Rogers , that Nova Scotia balladeer : 
we rise again in the voices of our children . 
we rise again in the laughter of our songs . 
we rise again like the waves on the ocean . 
we rise again . 
we will remember Gerry Ottenheimer and remember him well . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , I also was deeply saddened by the loss of Senator Gerry Ottenheimer . 
as a fellow Newfoundlander , as well as a fellow Conservative , I came to know him very well , especially during our years together here in Ottawa . 
like all who knew him , I developed a sincere respect for his intellect and his scholarly approach to the political process and the issues of public policy with which we deal . 
i admired his knowledge of parliamentary procedure and his respect for our traditions . 
i valued his gentlemanly character and his good humour . 
i know that all of his colleagues here , of whatever political persuasion , admired and respected Senator Ottenheimer for those same qualities . 
for over three decades , Gerry Ottenheimer served his party , his province and his country in public life . 
he helped to build the Conservative Party of Newfoundland in the sixties and was first elected to the House of Assembly in 1966 . 
he was Leader of the Opposition from 1967 to 1969 . 
during the 1970 s and 1980 s , he served in Conservative provincial governments as Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs , Minister of Education , Speaker of the House of Assembly , Minister of Justice and Attorney General , Minister of Labour , Government House Leader , and Minister of Energy . 
since 1987 , he has been a valued member of the Senate , including serving as Deputy Speaker since 1991 . 
the loss of Senator Ottenheimer will be mourned throughout the world - not just here in Canada . 
he was a former chairman of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and maintained contact with legislators in many other countries . 
i recall when I visited Australia last year , I met a number of Australian parliamentarians who knew Gerry and inquired about him . 
during his years in the Senate he served on the Foreign Affairs Committee and maintained an active and scholarly interest in both Canada ' s foreign relations and domestic developments in other countries . 
in addition to his interest and experience in international parliamentary relations , Gerry Ottenheimer spoke at least eight languages . 
because of those skills and experience , he was often called upon to represent the government in meetings with foreign delegations , both here and abroad . 
in effect , he served during the past decade as Canada ' s unofficial ambassador to foreign parliamentarians . 
i am sure that Gerry would be delighted if that was how we were to remember him . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I immediately realized that this distinguished senator was in a class of his own . 
the first time we met , this native of Newfoundland greeted me in perfect French . 
it was clear to me that there was something special about Senator Gerry Ottenheimer . 
i later found out how easy it was for him to pick up new languages . 
i discovered his incredible talent while travelling with him . 
there is one aspect of his life that may have been overlooked and that is his unconditional support for the Meech Lake agreement . 
he was in Newfoundland at the time and I think that , as a French - speaking Quebecer , I must point this out . 
he always told me that it was unfortunate - and in this respect I agree with the people in the party I served so faithfully for 40 years - that the Victoria agreements negotiated by Mr. Trudeau and the Meech Lake accord had failed . 
i got to know him better when I was in Newfoundland with him for the first referendum on the language issue . 
he worked relentlessly , determined to ensure that minority rights would be respected . 
you will recall the speech he gave in the Senate which had a great impact on me ; I am still moved by it . 
i know for a fact that , if he had been here for our last debate on the Quebec school board issue , he and I would have taken a similar stance . 
unfortunately , you know what my circumstances were ; I was unable to attend that debate . 
it was the first time in 34 years . 
incidentally , I was elected 34 years ago today . 
for the first time in 34 years , I was away from Parliament for about 15 days . 
during the difficult times I went through , who do you think was watching over me almost constantly ? 
Gerry Ottenheimer , who was fighting for his own life in Newfoundland . 
i learned from him civility , a taste for excellence and concern for the rights of minorities wherever they are . 
i also travelled with him . 
i had begged him to come to Lebanon and Koweit with me . 
even though he was my guest , I made him the leader of our delegation since he was the Deputy Speaker of the Senate . 
you should have seen him . 
you should have seen Senator Ottenheimer that evening when he told me : " After all , I do not sell arms , I sell peace , understanding and openness . " 
i visited him in Trinity . 
what a privilege it was . 
i got to know his four daughters and his wife , Alma . 
listen to the names of his four daughters : 
g é raldine , Suzanne , Bernadette and Anne - Marie . 
rather impressive , no ? 
four daughters with names like that in Newfoundland . 
today , I want to thank them for making me discover Newfoundland , and also to assure them of my everlasting friendship . 
i will get an opportunity to see them again next summer . 
i could not attend his funeral because I was prohibited from flying . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis : 
honourable senators , as a senator from Newfoundland , I should like to associate myself with and endorse the remarks made by senators with respect to the late Senator Gerald Ottenheimer . 
i do not intend to repeat what has already been said concerning his career and his achievements ; that has been expressed quite well . 
however , I regarded Senator Ottenheimer as a good friend , and I found he and his wife , Alma , to be gracious hosts . 
when he was Minister of Justice in Newfoundland - and , of course , he was a Conservative , whereas I was a supporter of the Liberal Party - I always found him approachable , and receptive to ideas that I might have had with reference to matters concerning the legal profession in the province . 
honourable senators , I must emphasize that Gerry was a good citizen of Newfoundland and Canada , and he will be sorely missed by us all . 
to his wife , Alma , and his family , I extend my deepest sympathy . 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to add my tribute to those paid to Gerald Ottenheimer and to join my colleagues in expressing my sympathy to Alma and the family , whom I know very well from my days in Newfoundland in the 1970 s . 
Gerald was a unique man . 
he was an excellent cabinet minister , very dedicated to public service , as well as a very learned individual , whose wealth of knowledge I used to admire greatly . 
he could talk about many things , from poetry to history to language , mostly about his latest love , which was learning Russian . 
it was ironic that I inherited Gerry Ottenheimer ' s office when I came to the Senate . 
he moved down the hall to a little larger office , and apologized to me for three years because my office was smaller than his . 
my best times with him and Alma were spent in Trinity Bay at their summer home or in their wonderful house on Waterford Bridge Road . 
their hospitality was wonderful , as my Newfoundland colleagues well know . 
above all , his ability to learn and his constant quest for knowledge was an extraordinary quality . 
his wife will tell you that he always wore out the left shoe of every pair of shoes he ever owned because he would pace whenever he was thinking . 
after he sat down , he would then get up and pace some more . 
alma was always having to buy him new shoes for every occasion . 
it is very sad to lose such a wonderful colleague , someone I have known for 20 years . 
i will always remember Gerry as a devoted Newfoundlander and a true gentleman . 
i will miss him and I will miss our chats about our Senate work and Newfoundland , and I will remember all the things he taught me about my job here . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , please rise for a minute of silence . 
honourable senators then stood in silent tribute . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
olympic Winter Games 
opening of 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government : 
honourable senators , I think that all of us who heard the wonderful chorus that opened the Nagano Olympics , the glorious chorus of voices in Nagano and the massed choruses around the world which performed the magisterial Ode to Joy - choruses which performed at the Brandenburg Gate , in False Bay near Cape Town , inside the General Assembly Hall of the United Nations , in front of the Forbidden City in Beijing , as well as on the steps of the Sydney Opera House - were overwhelmed by the emotion of the moment . 
on that late afternoon in February , the spirit of a linked world captivated millions across the planet . 
it was hard to imagine that over 50 years ago , with the prospect of an allied invasion of Japan growing , the Imperial family withdrew from Tokyo for a last stand in the snowy mountains outside Nagano . 
as the Eighteenth Winter Olympics opened in the spirit of peace and under the umbrella of the Olympic Truce , it was hard to picture the rubble of several Japanese cities testifying to the devastation and horror of the atomic bomb . 
old conflicts and old wounds were forgotten as we watched the opening celebrations ; as we saw the mixture of high technology and ancient traditions ; as we saw jets soaring overhead and watched 500 - pound Sumo wrestlers stamping out evil spirits ; as we heard the temple bell ring out the first official sound of the opening ceremony from the wonderful Zenkoji Temple , a sacred place that dates back over 1,300 years . 
in Nagano , a magical frame of mind captivated the spectators and the 2,450 athletes from 72 countries as they marched into Minami Stadium , many of them moved by laughter and tears of joy . 
as our all - time largest and most ambitious Winter Olympics contingent of 154 athletes marched proudly with them into that stadium , including 41 previous Olympians , they did so under the overwhelming panorama of an Eastern culture in a place where East and West united ; in a place where the continents of the world were united in the spirit of peace and good will . 
when the final torch relay runners brought the Olympic flame into the stadium , Chris Moon , a British officer who was a victim of a land - mine which exploded when he was helping to remove mines in Mozambique , came with them , a representative of the Land Mine Survivors Network . 
i believe that at that time all Canadians , for obvious reasons , stood just a little taller . 
the Olympics mean many things . 
they are about skating faster and soaring higher ; about a new sport called " boarding , " replete with its own vocabulary ; about rock and roll sports like freestyle skiing . 
they are about the dangerous curves of speed skating and the thrill of a slapshot on open ice in men ' s and women ' s hockey . 
they are about sports with long and proud histories , like the biathlon and curling , and TV - driven events like the aerials . 
the Olympics are about a planet united , about the bonds that bring us together being stronger than those keeping us apart . 
they are about reflection on all those citizens of the world who gathered in Paris 50 years ago to sign the historic Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
the Nagano Olympics are the last winter games before a new millennium . 
most of all , these games are about the power of the simple , timeless dignity of the human spirit , of the human heart . 
they are about a magical state of mind , about a remarkable power alive and well in the winter air of Japan . 
honourable senators , you do not have to look very far to see it , because that power is us . 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nations Against Iraq - State of Readiness of Troops and Mat é riel 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , as I speak today , an armada of some three aircraft carriers , five destroyers , three frigates , a cruiser , and one attack submarine gather in the Persian Gulf . 
more ships are on their way , including another submarine , a destroyer , an aircraft carrier , a helicopter carrier , a cruiser - primary defence for the carrier group . 
well over 300 aircraft sit at the ready , prepared to strike a deranged and very disturbed dictator . 
Saddam Hussein , armed with weapons of mass destruction , such as VX nerve gas , anthrax , botulinum toxin , and a very large conventional military , threatens his neighbours and the civilized world . 
honourable senators , our closest historic allies and our largest trading partners sit poised to strike to effect the mandate of the United Nations and this government has only a token force to offer in support . 
what has happened to our nation ; a nation which contributed so significantly to past conflicts - World War I , World War II and the Korean War ? 
have we sunk so low that we have virtually nothing to offer ? 
are we a sideshow now among our allies ? 
are we an international afterthought ? 
wither the Canadian forces ? 
so much for the 1994 defence white paper in which many of us placed so much hope . 
i will wager that that white paper is something about which Liberal left - wing thinkers would like to forget . 
i think they were scared by their own defence policy and have failed to implement any of its very urgent and required recommendations ; recommendations such as submarines , replacements for the Sea King , new multi - role support vessels for the navy , 3,000 extra soldiers , new armoured personnel carriers for the Canadian army , upgraded weaponry , and search and rescue helicopters for the Canadian Air Force . 
to date , this government has only recently chosen replacements for the Search and Rescue helicopter fleet , equipped their G - life endangered CF 18 s , and ordered some armoured personnel carriers in the form of the LAVs which we are now beginning to receive . 
the 3,000 troops for the army are in danger of being cut - and indeed are now projected to be cut . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Forrestall , I regret to have to interrupt you , but your allotted three - minute period is over . 
have you concluded your statement ? 
senator Forrestall : 
no , I have not . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
are you requesting leave to continue ? 
senator Forrestall : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I thank you for your indulgence . 
in any event , the whole thing just gets worse . 
my colleagues should glance at least once at chapter 6 of that same National Defence white paper , entitled " Contributing to International Security , " and read therein what is suggested as a possible Canadian contribution to multinational operations such as the one now underway in the Gulf - something of critical importance to this nation and to all responsible nations when a maniac has deadly weapons of mass destruction , has used them in the past and demonstrates a willingness to use them in the future . 
the 1994 Defence white paper says that the Canadian Forces should be prepared to deploy a joint task force comprising one or more of the following units : a naval task force of four ships ; three separate battle groups or a brigade group ; a fighter wing ; a transport squadron , and other personnel to support it . 
what are we offering ? 
perhaps a destroyer . 
we heard today , just a short hour ago , an announcement that one of our new destroyers , together with one aging helicopter and a few land side personnel , are being diverted to the Gulf from assignments elsewhere . 
honourable senators , to have equipment in place takes time . 
we might have been able to get there in time had we had this kind of equipment and support . 
either we continue in a cooperative defence posture with alliances such as NATO and the United Nations and fulfil our role in those undertakings , or we withdraw . 
we cannot have it both ways and expect a continuation of the kind of respect that has been shown in the past for the thousands upon thousands of Canadians who have given their lives in conflicts all over this globe . 
health 
dedication of Medical Profession - Tributes 
hon. Eugene Whelan : 
honourable senators , I wish to take a few moments to pay tribute to the medical profession of this great country of ours : the ambulance attendants , the nurses and the doctors , who all work or are on call 24 hours a day , seven days a week , for their dedication . 
without their dedication , how could we survive ? 
i know this from my own personal experience : 
one year ago today , the doctors , the nurses , the ambulance attendants , my local ambulance squad - which is made up of volunteers , much like a service club - took me from my home to the hospital at Hotel Dieu , Grace , Windsor . 
here again , the emergency staff , the doctors on duty - and we were lucky , because no one was in the emergency room at that time - if they had diagnosed my condition improperly as a heart attack , I would have died . 
however , they diagnosed it properly as a ruptured aorta . 
they then directed me to be taken to the London University Hospital Science Centre . 
there again , we were received by these expert and dedicated people who have no real known hours of duty . 
they are there on call . 
they serve . 
honourable senators , I say to you that without these knowledgeable , caring people , I never would have survived . 
this is my anniversary ; a year ago this day , February 10 , I received this wonderful care . 
the surgery that they performed on me that day was successful . 
i saw the doctor about one week ago in London , Ontario , and he looked at me as though I were a walking miracle . 
to the doctors and the medical staff , the ambulance attendants , and so on , thank you for the job you are doing for all of us in Canada . 
the Late J . B . Salsberg 
tributes 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , last Sunday The Toronto Star reported that one J . B . Salsberg , Joe Salsberg , aged 95 , died peacefully at his home in Toronto . 
yet J . B . ' s life was anything but peaceful . 
his compelling career mirrored the turbulence and tribulations of Canada in the 20 th century . 
his life serves as a kind of mixed metaphor for the anguish and honour , the travesties and the triumphs , the paradoxes and the passions , the disasters and the dreams of our era . 
following his father ' s wishes , as a youth he studied to become a rabbi . 
with hard work , he earned quick salary increases to $ 5 a week . 
suddenly , the rules changed and he was told that he would now have to work on commission . 
this experience transformed Salsberg into a tribune of the working classes . 
he lifted a torch for labour which he carried from that time until he drew his last breath . 
he always carried the torch with humour and honour . 
while searching for political answers , he joined a Zionist workers ' group and quickly rose to leadership , including the editorship of a newspaper in New York City , speaking to groups across North America . 
this canvas was still not broad enough for Joe ; not broad enough for his ideas or his energy . 
while post - World War I in the 1920 s was booming , the working conditions in Toronto were simply appalling . 
by 1926 , Joe came to believe that communism as a means of eradicating discrimination , eradicating anti - Semitism , encouraging Jewish culture , but above all alleviating the working conditions , was the answer . 
meanwhile , he became a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Canada . 
as a speaker , he would address mass rallies from coast to coast . 
he revelled in the idea that a Jewish immigrant boy from Spadina could be at home organizing miners in Sydney or dock workers in Vancouver . 
Salsberg was invited to secret workers ' meetings across Canada . 
union organizers would conceal him in their homes and churches while his speeches and ideas ignited the passion of key organizers and small worker groups . 
about this time , J . B . married Dora Wilensky , the love of his life . 
she was a pioneer social worker who spearheaded the creation of a Jewish Family and Child Services in Toronto , which became a leader in its field in Canada . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Grafstein , I am sorry to interrupt you , but your three - minute period has expired . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , may I have leave to continue ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Grafstein : 
thank you , senators . 
about this time , he married Dora Wilensky , the love of his life . 
she was a pioneer social worker who spearheaded the creation of the Jewish Family and Child Services in Toronto which became a leader in its field in social work in Canada . 
in 1959 , Dora died prematurely of cancer . 
they had no children , and J . B . never remarried . 
union organizing naturally led to politics , and politics was never the same once J . B . was elected to the Toronto City Council in 1938 . 
he became a tribune of the working classes , and he was re - elected . 
he became Toronto ' s most effective alderman , changing Toronto ' s living and social environment , and , in the process , even the values of his staunchest adversaries . 
in 1943 , he was elected to Queen ' s Park , becoming the lone Communist in the legislature . 
he became an eloquent advocate against discrimination of any kind , and he led the passage of the first bill outlawing discrimination in public places in Canada . 
an inspiring orator , he was usually drowned in a sea of heckling in the legislature . 
once , Salsberg , fed up , threatened to stop asking questions in Question Period , and the premier of the day , Leslie Frost , banned heckling from Question Period . 
frost so admired J . B . ' s eloquence , his wit , his commitment to his ideas , and his integrity that he named a township in Northern Ontario after him . 
j . B . held the seat for the St. Andrew ' s riding until 1955 , when he lost in one of the most bitter electoral campaigns in Canada . 
at the height of the Cold War , J . B . was accused of complacency if not complicity towards Soviet persecution of Jews in Russia . 
when rumour about purges and prosecutions emanated from Stalin ' s Soviet Russia , J . B . remained mute , neither opposing nor defending the horrendous stories seeping out from behind the Iron Curtain . 
j . B . was a true believer . 
after he lost the provincial election , he travelled to Moscow in 1956 to learn firsthand the fate of Jews and others at the hand of the Soviet state . 
this included an angry confrontation with Nikita Khruschev himself in the Kremlin . 
in 1957 , returning to Toronto disillusioned , he denounced Communism . 
as the number two person in the Communist Party in Canada , he left the party and took half the national executive with him . 
this effectively destroyed the Communist Party in Canada forever . 
supporters of all parties then wanted J . B . to run for them , but Joe had had enough of politics . 
Joe ' s heart was broken . 
he turned to business and community affairs . 
he did volunteer social work , volunteer labour work , and became a leading figure of local Jewish culture and worker ' s causes , writing a regular column for the Canadian Jewish News . 
Joe knew each member of my family intimately . 
it was in this latter capacity that I came to know and admire him when I came to Toronto to study in the late 1950 s . 
Joe had an encyclopaedic knowledge about politics and people . 
he knew each member of my family - my paternal uncles , my maternal grandfather . 
he could place each in various shades of politics or culture or learning from left to right , from observant to secular . 
he was familiar with my father ' s own military record , fighting against Bolsheviks in Europe after World War I , yet he never criticized him or his memory . 
" each man , " he said , " must do what he must do . " 
the very first day after I was appointed to the Senate , I received a call , well after midnight , at the Ch â teau Laurier . 
it was J . B . on the line , whispering to me in Yiddish . 
in hushed tones , he told me that he had decided to write a story about me , my family , and my appointment to the Senate for the Canadian Jewish News . 
i asked him , " J . B . , why so late , why in Yiddish , and why were you whispering ? " 
j . B . ' s response was , " Because ... they are still listening in Ottawa . " 
we continued to whisper our interview in Yiddish for an hour or so in the darkness of that cold , dark January night . 
as I said earlier , J . B . was a true believer . 
he learned the harsh way that radical ideology first separates , then crushes , and eventually eradicates the dreams and the hopes of those very people who promote any harsh or radical ideology . 
when he was about to turn 90 , he was asked to look back on his career . 
about his convictions , he said this : " Despite my age , I ' m still filled with faith in man ' s rise to ever higher and higher levels . 
i am still hurt when I see , or hear people being cruel to one another . " 
then he was asked , if he were to write his epitaph , what it would read . 
he said , " Here lies a man who tried to do the right thing . " 
j . B . did . 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call the next item on the Order Paper , I should like to wish you all welcome back after the recess . 
honourable senators , I am sure you have all come back refreshed and full of enthusiasm . 
i should like to introduce to you a new Page . 
honourable senators , Robbie Tremblay is a native of the National Capital Region , the village of Navan , Ontario to be more precise . 
he is studying political science and history at the University of Ottawa . 
he is not a newcomer to the Senate , as he worked for some time as the messenger - receptionist in Human Resources , where he was responsible for the Senate information line . 
he is replacing Suzanne Vo , who was assigned to us before Christmas and is now working for a senator . 
welcome to the Senate as a page , Robbie . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons is a very successful program , and the Pages who come to us from the House report that it is a worthwhile exchange . 
i should like to introduce to you the two Pages from the House of Commons who will be with us this week . 
John Doulamis of Montreal is enrolled in the Faculty of Administration at the University of Ottawa . 
Serge LeVert - Chiasson of Dartmouth , Nova Scotia , is continuing his studies in administration at the University of Ottawa . 
i welcome you both to the Senate . 
i trust that your time with us will be interesting and worthwhile . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , February 11 , 1998 , at 1:30 in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
agreed 
hon. Senators : 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 18 , to amend the Customs Act and the Criminal Code . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , February 12 , 1998 . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Anne C . Cools presented Bill S - 12 , to amend the Criminal Code ( abuse of process ) . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
cardinal Ambrozic 
conveyance of Felicitations of Senate on Appointment of His Eminence - Notice of Motion 
hon. Stanley Haidasz : 
honourable senators , it was with great jubilation and pride that members of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toronto received in January this year the happy news that His Holiness John Paul II - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i have heard you making an intervention . 
senator Haidasz : 
honourable senators , that was the preamble to my motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
this is Notices of Motions , which take notice . 
if you wish to ask for leave to move your motion , you are entitled to do so . 
senator Haidasz : 
honourable senators , I ask leave to move the following motion this afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i hear a " no . " 
i am sorry , Senator Haidasz , you do not have leave to move it today , but you can proceed to give notice for tomorrow . 
senator Haidasz : 
then , honourable senators , I give notice that , at the next sitting of the Senate , I shall move : 
that the Honourable The Speaker convey to His Eminence Aloysius Cardinal Ambrozic the felicitations and prayers of the Senate of Canada and our fervent wishes that his new role in the Church may be blessed in the service of the men and women of Canada , and especially of the Archdiocese of Toronto . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Examine Governance Provisions of Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , on behalf of Senator Kirby , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce be authorized to examine and report upon the governance provisions set out in the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act ( previously Bill C - 2 ) ; 
that the Committee be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings ; 
that the Committee be authorized to adjourn from place to place in Canada for the purpose of pursuing its study ; 
that the Committee be authorized to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary ; and 
that the committee present its final report no later than March 31 , 1998 . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
veterans Affairs Subcommittee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I am informed that Minister Sheila Copps will be appearing before the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs tomorrow afternoon at 3 p.m. 
accordingly , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs have power to sit at three o ' clock in the afternoon tomorrow , Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators , to proceed now ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , February 17 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution ; its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire for equal numbers of senators representing each province ; the length of term of office , the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level , and the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nationals against Iraq - Chain of Command on Disposition of Troops and Mat é riel - Request for Debate 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , as I indicated earlier , the Prime Minister has now advised the nation that Canada has directed to the Gulf the Canadian patrol frigate HMCS Toronto , two C - 130 aircraft and a number of ground personnel . 
honourable senators , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate take the opportunity to enlighten this chamber as to the tasking mission , the role this group will play , and under whose immediate control they will be , so that I will not have to bother him later ? 
would he give us some kind of assurance , as I asked him to do back in November or early December , that an opportunity to discuss this question at length here in the chamber might be provided , so that we may understand and not have to learn from the news media just what actions the Canadian Armed Forces personnel are undertaking ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is open to all honourable senators to initiate an inquiry on this or any other subject . 
with respect to obtaining the kind of information that my honourable friend wants prior to learning from the media , I suggest that it would be impossible to hear the news any earlier than when we heard it from the Prime Minister ' s lips last night , when he informed Canadians of his intentions and of the announcements that would be made today following the cabinet meeting , by the Prime Minister , the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of National Defence . 
canada , of course , will be playing a support role , as Senator Forrestall indicated . 
he is quite correct in saying that the HMCS Toronto , which is now in Mediterranean waters , will be sent to the Gulf area , as well as two Hercules aircraft which could be used for transport as well as air refuelling . 
that is in addition to the nine Canadian Forces personnel onboard U.S. AWACS aircraft which are patrolling the no - fly zone over Iraq . 
with respect to under whose control these people , the frigate and the aircraft will be , I will have to ask my colleagues for that information . 
senator Forrestall : 
i asked for this in November of last year . 
there was much opportunity to lay such a motion before this chamber , irrespective of what decisions the other chamber might want to take . 
perhaps they might have benefited from an enlightened debate in this chamber as to conditions under which we should release troops in the first place , what should their role be , who should give them that task and who should command them . 
i ask the leader to reconsider my request of November 19 and lay before this chamber a motion that is debatable so that we might vote on it , should that be necessary . 
i should hope that we would be able to produce a unanimous decision with respect to a debatable motion . 
that could only lend strength to the commitment we have made . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , as I indicated earlier , I would be very happy to consider that matter and take it under advisement . 
however , at the same time it is open to the honourable senator , or any other honourable senator , to initiate an appropriate inquiry that would cover all the points that I am sure my honourable friend would want considered . 
solicitor General 
activities of Organized Crime - Money Laundering in New Brunswick - Government Position 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it concerns an aspect of organized crime which is particularly serious in New Brunswick . 
according to the RCMP , New Brunswick is a top spot in Canada for money laundering . 
apparently , New Brunswick ' s location and its geography make it a prime spot in the money laundering business . 
this report casts a dark shadow over New Brunswick ' s entire economy because organized crime typically invests or hides its ill - gotten proceeds by investing in legitimate businesses . 
if true , this dirty money scheme is undermining other legitimate New Brunswick businesses financed by honest investors and is giving the province a black eye , with a reputation as a somewhat sleazy place to do business . 
my supplementary question to the leader relates to a published report attributed to an RCMP official based in Ottawa that our laws regarding money laundering are relatively weak . 
could the minister advise whether changes in the legislation are contemplated that would allow the enforcement agencies to get tougher with these criminals ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as usual the honourable senator raises a very important point . 
i know that this sort of thing is a matter of great concern to all the people of New Brunswick , and should be of concern to all the people of Canada . 
with respect to changes in legislation , I am not aware of any at the present time , but it might be appropriate and timely to suggest such changes to further strengthen the law where it is necessary . 
i have been made aware of the problem in New Brunswick , and I certainly will bring my honourable friend ' s representations to the attention of the Solicitor General and determine whether any specific measures are contemplated to fight this problem at the present time . 
i would be interested in receiving any information my honourable friend has in her possession that would further enforce what I would have to say to the Solicitor General . 
senator Robertson : 
i shall send all of the information I have on this issue to the office of my honourable friend . 
the Economy 
strengthening of Economy of New Brunswick - Comments of Solicitor General - Request for Particulars 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , I have another question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
perhaps he could help me understand the meaning of a report that was in the news in New Brunswick sometime over the Christmas break . 
it relates to unspecified plans that the Solicitor General , in his capacity as the regional minister for Atlantic Canada , is working on that will benefit the region . 
too often in the past - and perhaps you might not agree with this - the government down home has said things that increase expectations that something is really in the works , particularly to do with the persistent problems of high unemployment , the wage gap between the Atlantic provinces and the rest of Canada , and the overall slower growth of the region . 
too often it turns out that things are said simply for their public relations value . 
i should really like to know what the minister is talking about . 
to phrase it another way , is the Solicitor General saying that he is working on plans that would help strengthen the region ' s economy , to help people get back to work , and to help provide more dignity to those who simply cannot look after themselves as well as they might ? 
if so , perhaps the honourable leader would provide the Senate with specific details of any such initiatives , including action plans and completion dates ? 
what is the Solicitor General talking about ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I cannot put words in Minister Scott ' s mouth , but if the honourable senator would provide me with the information that she has in her possession , I will bring it to the attention of my colleague . 
minister Scott has had many discussions . 
i have heard him on many occasions , both with colleagues around the cabinet table and in regional meetings , emphasize the need for special , innovative and creative measures to deal with the chronic unemployment situation in Atlantic Canada . 
being very specific , my honourable friend will know that we cannot have two economies , one west of the Ottawa River and one east of the Ottawa River , as many people are fond of saying . 
senator Robertson : 
honourable senators , as a supplementary , I am sure we have all read the Solicitor General ' s comments on some of these things . 
we keep reading about what he will do , but we never know what precisely it is that he will do . 
i am afraid that , at this stage in the game , we are worn out with surprises down east . 
i am sure the honourable senator would agree with that . 
we would like some honest delivery of new ideas and new development , and perhaps there will be something in Mr. Martin ' s budget . 
i have heard the Solicitor General go on at length , and I should like to know what it is precisely that he is talking about . 
justice 
young Offenders Act - Request for Changes by Province of Saskatchewan - Government Position 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , last week the Government of Saskatchewan sent a letter to the Minister of Justice calling for changes to the Young Offenders Act . 
in particular , the Government of Saskatchewan would like the right to publicize the names of violent or chronic young offenders , and the ability to transfer serious , violent or chronic young offenders to adult court . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that the minister will respond specifically to problems that have been raised by a minister in one specific province . 
justice renewal , of course , is a priority of the government . 
i am sure Senator Cochrane would agree that legislative amendments alone are not enough to address the problems of youth crime . 
we need a multifaceted and cooperative youth justice strategy which includes preventive and early measures as well as legislative amendments . 
at the same time , this strategy must be fully capable of responding effectively to the full range of young offenders , including those who commit serious offences . 
senator Cochrane : 
honourable senators , youth crimes , especially violent crimes and repeated crimes against property , are a concern in many parts of Canada , including my own part of Canada . 
can the Leader of the Government tell us what other provinces or territories have requested changes to this act ? 
can correspondence from these governments on this issue be released to us ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I will attempt to obtain any such correspondence , and if it is available to be tabled in the chamber , I will be happy to do so . 
there was an extensive review of this issue last year . 
the Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights in the other place released a report on what was called renewing youth justice . 
the Minister of Justice will soon be responding to this report with a strategy for the renewal of youth justice . 
i know that there have been movements in some provinces about other measures that might be taken . 
one term is widely bandied about , and that is " restorative justice . " 
at the same time , I know that my honourable friend raises very legitimate concerns , and I would be happy to see if I cannot bring forward an answer that is more particularly germane to the question she raises with respect to specific correspondence from individual provinces . 
national Defence 
possible Strike by Western Nations against Iraq - Assessment of Risk of Humanitarian Disaster from Bombing Strikes on Specific Targets - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if the Leader of the Government wishes to turn back the tab to the defence file , then I should like to build on Senator Forrestall ' s questions . 
honourable senators , if the Government of Canada is now committed to supporting the American - planned intervention in Iraq should diplomatic efforts fail , I am somewhat concerned about the proposal for air strikes against strategic sites in Iraq , where biological and chemical weapons may be stored . 
i assume that there has been some risk assessment concerning that issue . 
has the Government of Canada conducted a risk assessment , or do you have assurances from the Americans on that topic ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of any particular risk assessment that has been made by Canada . 
however , I believe that those responsible have come to the conclusion that there is a greater risk from the weapons of mass destruction that are obviously being hidden by Saddam Hussein . 
that greater risk exists and the time has long passed for discussion - whether it is the United States , Canada , Britain and our allies or others who are concerned with the future of mankind . 
some kind of decisive action must be taken . 
as to which risk would be greater , to allow the present situation to prolong itself or to allow Saddam Hussein to build up more stores of weapons of mass destruction , President Clinton , Prime Minister Chr é tien and other world leaders have determined that action now is an absolute necessity . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , does the Leader of the Government not agree that the dropping of explosive devices - either smart bombs or stupid bombs - from 24,000 feet , or whatever altitude , involves a major margin of error in the sense that after bombing a site , these chemicals and biological materials will be totally out of control . 
if the Government of Canada is committing itself to a support role , yet to be fully defined in terms of the assets that will be designed and the effectiveness of those assets , the objective of the military intervention , if it comes to that , will involve bombing . 
we are told that it will not be a ground force intervention . 
what happens to the biological and chemical weapons which are in storage in silos , or wherever they store them ? 
what assurances do we have that they will not be released in a totally uncontrolled fashion , which could cause a humanitarian disaster the likes of which this world has yet to see . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I understand perfectly well . 
that is a concern of the entire world . 
it is a question of whether you act now or delay again while Saddam Hussein continues to build up his arsenal of mass destruction . 
there are no winners in a situation of this kind . 
we still hope that a diplomatic solution will be found . 
however , we cannot prolong a decision . 
i support the decision that Canada play a supporting role if , indeed , a diplomatic solution is not found and further action must be taken . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , has Canada consulted with our friends in countries such as Jordan , Saudi Arabia , Israel , Syria or Lebanon ? 
these countries are immediately adjacent to those sites , should a bombing exercise release that biological material into the environment . 
they are the people who will be immediately affected . 
has Canada been in diplomatic contact with those countries ? 
senator Graham : 
the answer is a very definitive , " Yes ; on a continuing basis . " 
national Finance 
proposed Merger of Royal Bank and Bank of Montreal - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government . 
a merger is being proposed between two of Canada ' s banks , namely , the Bank of Montreal and the Royal Bank of Canada . 
there was also a task force established by the federal government some time ago to study the future of financial institutions in Canada , including recommendations for possible changes to the Bank Act . 
is it the intention of the government to deal with this proposed merger prior to the final report of its financial task force being made public ? 
if so , what criteria will be applied to its decision - making process ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Minister of Finance has made it clear that no action will be taken until the task force report has been submitted . 
senator Atkins : 
will the task force be making an interim report before the summer break , and will it set out criteria for possible approval ? 
when can we expect to see such an interim report or government action on this matter ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of any interim report that is planned at the present time . 
i would be happy to determine if an interim report is contemplated , and I will bring that information to my honourable friend . 
senator Atkins : 
honourable senators , does the government not consider that the announcement of the banks regarding this merger is more important than putting it off until next fall ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the process was set in motion when the task force was established . 
the government still believes that that is the correct route . 
science , Research and Development 
cuts to Funding of Medical Research - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government , and it refers to the 1993 Liberal Red Book promise to provide stable funding for research granting councils . 
the Medical Research Council helps to fund vital medical research in Canadian universities . 
in spite of that promise of stable funding in 1993 , the budget of the Medical Research Council has been cut by $ 20 million . 
according to last year ' s estimates , a further $ 40 million will be cut by 1999 . The Globe and Mail reported on February 4 , 1998 , that the government now plans to at least cancel plans for their cuts as part of the learning initiative . 
assuming that this report is true , is the government prepared to commit that any new funding announced in this coming budget will represent stable funding and that medical research will not be cut again ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as I indicated , the budget will be brought down on February 24 . 
the government assigns very high priority to addressing the issue of funding for the Medical Research Council and other granting councils . 
we can look forward to the budget on February 24 and determine at that time what will be done with respect to future funding . 
senator Stratton : 
honourable senators , I am delighted that the Leader of the Government in the Senate has met with the President of the Medical Research Council . 
honourable senators , I had to see a doctor in December for a quick checkup which took three minutes . 
the doctor then spent 15 minutes pleading with me to make a case , federally and provincially . 
senior researchers are pleading for more money . 
they receive their grants 50 per cent of the time , but they are still desperately short . 
the young researchers do not have a hope , because the seniors are receiving all the grants . 
can the honourable senator give us any assurance that he will try , to the greatest extent possible , to ensure that funding is stabilized , if not increased ? 
senator Graham : 
senator Stratton spent 15 minutes with his doctor hearing about pressures with respect to the need for increased funding for medical research . 
i spent an hour and a half with Dr. Dickson and Dr. Friesen and I did not get the benefit of a checkup . 
however , I listened very carefully and I wish to assure my honourable friends that their representations were brought to the attention of my colleagues . 
the situation to which Senator Stratton alludes has led to strong representations and pressures on the government to restore or increase Medical Research Council funding . 
if I recall correctly , the House of Commons Finance Committee has recommended for the last three years that funding for the MRC and other councils be increased . 
if I recall correctly - and I may regret saying what I am about to say - the Minister of Finance indicated in October of 1997 that MRC funding would not only be restored but would be increased . 
the government ' s position will be made known in the 1998 budget . 
senator Stratton : 
may I remind the honourable leader of his words if that does not happen ? 
senator Graham : 
i know you will . 
revenue Canada 
possible Postponement of Income Tax Deadline Dates for Victims of Ice Storm - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , my question relates to the recent ice storm in Eastern Ontario and Quebec , and it is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the decision of the government to extend the RRSP deadline this year by one month is welcome news to those living in the area ravaged by January ' s ice storm , as was the decision made following the postal strike to extend by one month the deadline for charitable donations . 
however , there is another group of taxpayers who is also greatly in need of help . 
many small businesses and self - employed workers in areas hit by the ice storm are having a hard time paying their bills and meeting financial commitments . 
many have missed up to a month ' s income and many have suffered significant losses due to either the damage caused by the ice storm or the lack of electricity . 
march 15 looms as the deadline for these Canadians to make the first of their quarterly tax instalments to Revenue Canada , a deadline that many will have a hard time meeting . 
could the minister advise the Senate of whether any consideration will be given to extending the quarterly income tax payment deadline for those in the affected areas ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of any present proposal along those lines , but I should be very happy to make such representations on behalf of small businesses . 
i am sure that the officials responsible are quite cognizant of the need . 
while I am on my feet , I wish to pay special tribute to all the people in Quebec , Ontario , New Brunswick and other parts of Canada , and indeed our friends from south of the border , who came to assist in a remarkable demonstration of togetherness , helpfulness and community among Canadians . 
you had only to be in the Corel Centre on Sunday afternoon to see an indication of that spirit of community and that it is alive and well in Ottawa and the surrounding communities . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a number of delayed answers . 
i have a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 30 , 1997 by the Honourable Senator Marjory LeBreton with respect to the Airbus matter and letters to Swiss authorities ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 30 by the Honourable Senator John Lynch - Staunton with respect to the status of letters to Swiss authorities ; a response to a question 
raised in the Senate on November 5 by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton also with respect to a letter of withdrawal and apology to Swiss authorities ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 19 by the Honourable Senator Robertson regarding private wood lots in the Maritime provinces ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 20 by the Honourable Marjory LeBreton with respect to the wording of a letter to Swiss authorities ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 22 by the Honourable Senator Fernand Roberge regarding the identification and documentation of federal contaminated sites ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 3 by the Honourable Senator Donald Oliver with respect to the processing of refugees and a timetable ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 8 by Senator Robertson regarding community services for offenders and eligibility of non - violent offenders ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 8 by Honourable Senator Norman Atkins regarding the implementation of a law regarding visas for Canadians to enter the United States and the possibility of exemption ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Michael Forrestall regarding a search and rescue helicopter replacement program , a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Fernand Roberge regarding a reduction in transfer payments to the Province of Quebec ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 8 , 1997 by the Honourable Donald Oliver regarding the efficacy of tracking systems on unsuccessful refugee claimants ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Mabel DeWare regarding the reduction in transfer payments to provinces and the effect on the Atlantic ; responses to questions raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the tracking and detention of unsuccessful refugee claimants , a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Comeau regarding the negotiations on the multilateral agreement on investment ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 9 by the Honourable Senator Robertson , also with regard to transfer payments in the Atlantic provinces and increases in social transfers ; a response to questions raised in the Senate on December 10 by the Honourable Senator No ë l Kinsella and by the Honourable Senator Andreychuk regarding the United Nations committee ' s possible change in government policies ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 10 by Senator Oliver regarding the APEC summit ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 12 by Senator Spivak regarding the agreement on international humane trapping standards ; a response to questions raised in the Senate on December 12 by Senator Terry Stratton and Senator Janis Johnson regarding the Manitoba Sowind air crash at Little Grand Rapids and the response of the rescue team ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 12 by the Honourable Senator Grafstein regarding Quebec and the proportion of taxes controlled by the province ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 12 by the Honourable Senator Lowell Murray regarding a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and commitments made at Kyoto ; a response to a question raised on December 15 by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding the tolls on highways , including the Trans - Canada Highway ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 15 by the Honourable Senator Robertson regarding the publication on the Internet of hate propaganda ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 16 by the Honourable Senator Lowell Murray regarding the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 16 by the Honourable Senator Fernand Roberge regarding the millennium computer phenomenon ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 16 by the Honourable Senator Eymard Corbin regarding the Sable Island gas project ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 17 by the Honourable Senator Robertson regarding the Bay of Fundy and the destruction of infected salmon fish farms ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 18 by the Honourable Senator Stanley Haidasz regarding the request for funding to develop vaccine for the flesh eating disease ; and a response to a question raised in the Senate December 18 by the Honourable Senator Janis Johnson regarding the Bay of Fundy , also with respect to salmon on fish farms ; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 18 by the Honourable Senator Corbin regarding the Sable Island gas project . 
justice 
investigation Into Sale of Airbus Aircraft to Air Canada - Status of Letter to Swiss Authorities - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Marjory Lebreton on October 30 , 1997 ) 
the Department of Justice took appropriate action to ensure that there was no misunderstanding concerning the Letter of Request which was sent to the Swiss authorities in late September , 1995 . 
on November 14 , 1995 , a second letter was forwarded to the Swiss authorities re - emphasizing that the Letter of Request contained allegations only , and that it was sent in the context of a police investigation . 
in January , 1997 , subsequent to the out - of - court settlement with Mr. Mulroney , a third letter was sent to the Swiss authorities , informing them that the Government of Canada apologized for some of the language in the Letter of Request and clarifying once more that the letter contained allegations pursuant to a police investigation . 
it is noteworthy that in the Settlement Agreement , 
Mr. Mulroney specifically acknowledged that the RCMP and the Department of Justice , in sending the Request for Assistance to Switzerland , had acted within their legitimate responsibilities in this matter ; and , 
Mr. Mulroney also acknowledged that the RCMP must continue to investigate any allegations of illegality or wrongdoing which are brought to its attention . 
( response to question raised by Hon. John Lynch - Staunton on October 30 , 1997 ) 
the Letter of Request has not been withdrawn because there is an ongoing police investigation , and the Letter is part of that investigation . 
on November 27 , 1997 , RCMP Commissioner Murray stated that the Airbus investigation is " ongoing and active . " 
( response to question raised by Hon. John Lynch - Staunton on November 5 , 1997 ) 
regarding the request to remove Mr. Mulroney ' s name from the letter , the Department of Justice took appropriate action to ensure that there was no misunderstanding concerning the Letter of Request which was sent to the Swiss authorities in late September , 1995 . 
on November 14 , 1995 , a second letter was forwarded to the Swiss authorities re - emphasizing that the Letter of Request contained allegations only , and that it was sent in the context of a police investigation . 
in January 1997 , subsequent to the out - of - court settlement with Mr. Mulroney , a third letter was sent to the Swiss authorities , informing them that the Government of Canada apologized for some of the language in the Letter of Request and clarifying once more that the letter contained allegations pursuant to a police investigation . 
it is noteworthy that in the Settlement Agreement , 
Mr. Mulroney specifically acknowledged that the RCMP and the Department of Justice , in sending the Request for Assistance to Switzerland , had acted within their legitimate responsibilities in this matter ; and , 
Mr. Mulroney also acknowledged that the RCMP must continue to investigate any allegations of illegality or wrongdoing which are brought to its attention . 
forestry 
private Wood - Lots in Maritime Provinces - Task Force Recommendations - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Brenda M. Robertson on November 19 , 1997 ) 
in September 1997 , the National Round Table on the Environment and Economy ( NRTEE ) released a report entitled , State of the Debate on the Environment and the Economy : 
private Woodlot Management in the Maritimes . 
after the release of this report , the NRTEE sponsored a workshop in October in Ottawa to discuss specific economic instruments to encourage sustainability on private lands . 
this included a roundtable session on encouraging sustainability for private wood - lots . 
the purpose of the workshop was to develop specific proposals on tax and other measures which could be included in the NRTEE ' s pre - Budget 1998 submission to the Minister of Finance . 
the Department of Finance participated in the NRTEE workshop and has now received the NRTEE ' s specific recommendations relating to private wood - lots . 
the Minister of Finance will consider the NRTEE ' s recommendations in preparing the Federal Government ' s 1998 Budget . 
justice 
investigation into Sale of Airbus Aircraft to Air Canada - Officials Responsible for Wording in Letter to Swiss Authorities - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Marjory LeBreton on November 20 , 1997 ) 
the International Assistance Group receives and reviews all Letters of Request presented by investigating police agencies . It 
is a matter of public record that the Senior Counsel of the International Assistance Group reviewed and signed the Letter of Request which went to the Swiss authorities . 
no one in the Department of Justice outside the International Assistance Group worked on the Letter of Request . 
a general description of the process followed in the drafting of the Letter of Request is found in the Statement of Assumed Facts which was filed in the Mulroney court proceedings . 
the Environment 
identification and Documentation of Federal Contaminated Sites - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Fernand Roberge on December 2 , 1997 ) 
under the current government accountability framework , departments are responsible for managing the contaminated properties under their custody . 
this includes the identification and listing of contaminated properties , as well as the assessment and ultimate remediation of these sites . 
timetables , along with action plans for dealing with contaminated sites should be provided by departments in their sustainable development strategies which were tabled in the House on December 10 , 1997 . 
the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development may then monitor the progress achieved across the federal government . 
the Treasury Board Secretariat is responsible for maintaining information on federal real property holdings as well as developing central policies dealing with the general management of the federal land portfolio and the reporting of liabilities in the Public Accounts . 
for its part , Environment Canada has contributed , and continues to develop , scientific and technical guidance useful for federal stakeholders in managing their environmental issues . 
in the Auditor General ' s follow - up evaluation , preparedness was addressed for marine oil and chemicals as well as non - marine chemicals . 
environment Canada was primarily involved with the follow - up on non - marine chemicals . 
a number of initiatives have been undertaken in the last five years to ensure a higher level of emergency preparedness in Canada . 
MIACC is a national voluntary multi - stakeholder forum comprising several federal departments , the provinces , industry and first responder organizations . 
since 1995 , over 1500 sites and approximately 500 such communities have been identified . 
environment Canada co - chairs the Federal Committee on Environmental Emergencies . 
this body coordinates the activities of affected federal departments in the event of a major environmental emergency . 
finally , the government has indicated that it is committed to reintroducing the CEPA legislation early in its mandate . 
the Bill contains provisions for environmental matters related to emergencies . 
environment Canada is currently considering input from stakeholders on the various provision including emergencies , before re - introduction of the Bill . 
environment Canada will produce a report to Parliament in early 1998 on the destruction of federal PCB wastes . 
over 95 % of the federal PCB wastes that were in storage in 1995 were destroyed under a national contract between Public Works and Government Services Canada and BOVAR Waste Management Inc. 
immigration 
estimate of Overall Costs of Processing Refugees - Timetable for Presentation to Parliament - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on December 3 , 1997 ) 
the Immigration and Refugee Board identifies in its 1997 - 98 Main Estimates an amount of $ 39.46 M. with respect to Refugee Determination . 
however , the Department has previously indicated it will undertake a review of the in - Canada refugee processing costs . 
it was decided that the study would commence following the completion of the recent Departmental re - engineering exercise in order to capture costs associated with new ways of operation . 
the study has recently commenced and it is planned that results will be available in the 1998 - 99 fiscal year . 
monitoring of Progress of Refugee Claims - Government Policy 
a ) The Department does monitor the progress of individual refugee claims . 
information concerning the status of a refugee claim is exchanged between the Department and the Immigration and Refugee Board . 
however , the Department does not have the capability to produce collective statistics on some aspects of the process . 
b ) With respect to determining the eligibility of a refugee claimant upon entry to Canada , all refugee claimants are photographed and fingerprinted at the time the initial claim is made . 
photos and prints are then sent to the RCMP to be checked against the criminal history data bank . 
this check determines whether the claimant has a criminal record in Canada or whether a previous refugee claim has been made . 
the majority of persons who claim refugee status are undocumented . 
immigration officers must rely on information provided by the claimant in a sworn declaration and their fingerprints . 
in 1997 , immigration officials asked the RCMP to complete additional checks against foreign data banks on claimants where background information gave reason to conduct further investigation . 
over 1,900 such checks were made . 
obtaining background information on refugee claimants is a major challenge . 
however , even where a claimant has committed a serious offense , they are eligible to be heard by the Convention Refugee Determination Division ( CRDD ) unless the Minister has issued an opinion that they are a danger to the public . 
likewise a claimant described for a security violation is eligible to have a claim heard unless the Minister issues an opinion that it would be contrary to the public interest . 
the passage of Bill C - 44 in 1995 enacted legislative changes which enhanced the power of the Minister to deal with the misuse of the refugee protection system by serious criminals and by persons making fraudulent or multiple claims . 
for example , Bill C - 44 allows a senior immigration officer to re - visit positive eligibility decisions in claims pending before the Immigration and Refugee Board ( IRB ) where there is a conviction for a serious crime . 
it also allows a senior immigration officer to determine , in cases where a person has made multiple claims to be a refugee which of the claims is the official claim and to nullify all other claims . 
it must be remembered , however , that a very small number of claimants are found to be ineligible after the results of these checks are completed . 
in 1996 , only 31 cases out of more than 25,000 had to be reconsidered after the results of these checks were received . 
given these numbers , it is sound management to refer claims to the Convention Refugee Determination Division ( CRDD ) while we await the results of these checks so as not to delay all cases for the small proportion that will be found ineligible . 
the criteria to access the refugee determination process were designed to ensure that Canada ' s protection would be extended to all those with a genuine claim to persecution . 
the Department is exploring ways to expand and enhance our ability to conduct background investigations , without jeopardizing the safety of claimants and their families . 
as the Auditor - General himself noted , the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration established an Immigration Legislative Review Advisory Group tasked with formulating recommendations to improve immigration legislation . 
this review includes a thorough examination of the current refugee determination process . 
recommendations on ways to protect the integrity and efficiency of the system were made in the Advisory Group Report . 
in the coming months , the Minister will be holding public hearings and consulting on the report ' s recommendations in order to give as many interested parties and stakeholders as possible the opportunity to be heard . 
solicitor General 
community Services for Offenders - Eligibility of Non - violent Criminals - Request for Clarification 
( response to question raised by Hon. Brenda M. Robertson on December 8 , 1997 ) 
in the September , 1997 , Speech from the Throne , the Government pledged to develop alternatives to incarceration for low - risk , non - violent offenders , through sentencing reforms , community diversion programs and alternative sanctions . 
for some offenders and some offences incarceration is the only appropriate sanction . 
for a smaller number of offenders a very long period of incarceration may be our only viable alternative . 
society has the right to be protected , Canadians have the right to be safe . 
but we need to be clear about whom we want and need most to be protected from and how we can most efficiently ensure that protection . 
we should avoid what we are seeing in some other countries where prison has become the response of first choice to crime of almost all types . 
in May , 1996 , Federal / Provincial and Territorial Ministers Responsible for Justice reviewed the " Corrections Population Growth " paper and endorsed a number of recommendations , including a set of principles to guide future direction . 
one of the principles contained in the paper states : 
determining when an alternative to incarceration may be appropriate requires a thorough evaluation of each potential case . 
some of the factors that should be taken into consideration include : 
the criminal history of the offender ; 
the nature of the current offence ; 
the social history of the offender ; 
the substance abuse history 
the availability of suitable programs in the community , and numerous other factors . 
public safety remains the Government ' s number one priority , but our criminal justice system must be organized to be more effective and efficient in order to contribute to the long - term protection of the public . 
canada - United States Relations 
implementation of Law Requiring Visas for Canadians to Enter United States - Possibility of Exemption - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Senator Norman K . Atkins on December 8 , 1997 ) 
from the outset , Canada ' s Embassy in Washington has been vigilant in its efforts to protect Canada ' s interests . 
although the new immigration legislation was introduced in 1995 , Section 110 was not part of the original House and Senate bills . 
in fact , Section 110 did not publicly appear in the legislation until the Conference Report was released for printing on September 24 , 1996 - three business days before the Act was signed by President Clinton . 
the Embassy and the U.S. Administration ( Justice Department / Immigration & Naturalization Service ) discovered Section 110 in mid - October after an exhaustive review of the 251 page Conference Report . 
the Embassy consulted the Administration ( INS ) who confirmed that the unfortunate use of the word alien could affect Canadians and the northern border . 
the Embassy immediately contacted the Chief Counsels of both the House and Senate Immigration Subcommittees to clarify the meaning of the legislation . 
they both confirmed that the intent was to develop an overstays monitoring system for nationals of countries who enjoy a visa exemption under the 1986 Visa Waiver Programme and nationals of countries who require a visa . 
they also confirmed that the measure was never intended to target Canadians who , incidentally , were visa - exempt well before the introduction of the 1986 Visa Waiver Programme . 
the Chief Counsels proposed the exchange of letters between the Ambassador and the two Chairs as a means of clarifying legislative intent and allowing the Administration to exempt Canadians from Section 110 ' s implementation . 
at that stage , the Administration indicated that an exchange of letters clarifying the legislative intent could be sufficient to exempt Canada from the measure . 
the Embassy and Congressional staff worked closely , through numerous drafts and consultations , to develop what became the exchange of correspondence between the Ambassador and the two Immigration Subcommittee Chairs in December 1996 . 
unfortunately , INS changed its view and considered further Congressional direction was required . 
as a result , the Government of Canada , in cooperation with Congressional allies , launched a public advocacy campaign to restore the status quo ante . 
as part of the advocacy strategy , the Embassy and consulates have been speaking to key government officials , U.S. business interests , and to over two dozen newspapers , journals and magazines from all regions in the U.S. , including the New York Times , the Detroit Free Press , the Seattle Times and the Miami Herald . 
at the same time , the Prime Minister , Ministers Axworthy , Marchi , Robillard , Collenette and Dhaliwal , and Parliamentarians have raised this issue with their U.S. counterparts . 
as a result of Canada ' s advocacy initiative , the U.S. administration has publicly stated its concern that implementation of Section 110 would be very problematic and detrimental to efforts made to simplify cross - border travel . 
it is , therefore , clear that the Embassy took immediate action to address the Section 110 and has continued to defend Canadian interests . 
as a result of their activism , Michigan Senator Spencer Abraham took up the fight against the border measure and introduced a bill to repeal the effects of Section 110 . 
on a parallel track , Representative Solomon has also introduced an amendment that delays Section 110 ' s implementation for one year . 
canada is concerned that Solomon ' s bill would maintain Section 110 and prolong the uncertainty surrounding its potential implementation . 
the two different approaches reflected in the bills will be addressed when Congress reconvenes in January 1998 . 
we are encouraged by the support being generated for Canada ' s position and will continue to put pressure on the U.S. Congress and Administration in a concerted manner to advance the legislative approach adopted by Senator Abraham . 
national Defence 
search and Rescue Helicopter Replacement Program - Possible Cabinet Discussion on Awarding Contract for Helicopter Purchase - Government Position 
as of December 16 , 1997 , 29 of 30 Sea King helicopters have been inspected . 
one has yet to be inspected as it is at sea ; it is expected to return to port on December 18 , 1997 at which time it will be inspected . 
27 of 29 inspected helicopters have been deemed serviceable . 
2 . At the time the special inspection of the Sea King fleet was ordered , three aircraft were deployed at sea . 
there was no impact on training with our allies , and Canada received no criticism from them regarding this special inspection . 
federal Provincial Relations 
( response to question raised by Hon. Fernand Roberge on December 9 , 1997 ) 
Quebec will receive $ 6.8 billion ( cash and tax transfer ) this year under the Canada Health and Social Transfer ( CHST ) . 
this will increase by almost $ 400 million to $ 7.2 billion in 2002 - 03 . 
figures that suggest that transfers to Quebec will decline ignore the tax point transfer which is an integral part of the CHST . 
it is necessary to include both the tax point transfer as well as the cash transfer component when calculating the total - tax points increase in value over time and thus represent a growing source of revenue for provinces . 
in 1997 - 98 , Quebec will receive almost $ 3 billion under the CHST tax point transfer . 
there are no separate cash floors for each province and territory . 
the $ 12.5 billion cash floor applies to the country as a whole - all provinces benefit from the protection offered by the floor . 
immigration 
efficacy of Tracking System on Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants - Government Position 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on December 8 , 1997 ) 
at the outset , it is important to state that Canada does not have exit controls at the border . 
it is important to note that removals are a high priority for the Department of Citizenship and Immigration , with the greatest focus being given to the removal of foreign criminals and failed refugee claimants . 
there has been a 38 % increase in removals to the end of September of this year , compared to the same period last year . 
of the total outstanding removal orders , the vast majority are failed refugee claimants and those who have overstayed their visitor status . 
the majority are NOT criminals . 
CIC is committed to reducing impediments to removals and over the past two years has introduced a number of measures which demonstrate this commitment . 
for example , bi - lateral removal agreements have been signed with a number of countries to facilitate removals and negotiations are continuing for new agreements with others . 
the Immigration Regulations have been changed to streamline certain review processes ( PDRCC ) . 
CIC has increased dialogue with provincial and municipal authorities to obtain agreements for sharing information on persons to be removed , and is examining ways to encourage voluntary compliance with removal orders . 
a ) Bonds are only requested for refugee claimants where there is reason to believe the person is unlikely to appear as directed . 
the Immigration Act provides the authority to require cash bonds , performance bonds or a combination of both where necessary to ensure a person ' s compliance with terms and conditions of admission or release from detention . 
our current system does not break down the number of bonds taken for refugee claimants versus other enforcement cases . 
b ) Bonds are not posted by groups or corporations on behalf of individuals so there is no record of church groups posting bonds for refugee claimants in Canada . 
church groups may sign an undertaking to support a refugee ( s ) who has been selected abroad for the initial period of settlement in Canada . 
however , this agreement is to ensure that the refugee ( s ) will receive the support they require to integrate into Canadian society . 
federal - Provincial Relations 
reduction in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Effect on Atlantic Provinces 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mabel M. DeWare on December 9 , 1997 ) 
the less well - off provinces receive far more transfers from the federal government than the better - off provinces precisely so that they can provide their residents with the same kind of services as other provinces - including health , education , and social assistance . 
this redistribution is accomplished primarily through the Equalization program which provides over $ 8 billion a year only to the less well - off provinces . 
Ontario , Alberta and B.C. receive no Equalization . 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer ( CHST ) is intended to help all provinces with the costs of health , post - secondary education and social assistance . 
thanks to the fiscal progress the federal government has made , the CHST will increase in Atlantic Canada , Saskatchewan and Manitoba , next year , the year after and , in fact , every year as far as projections are available out to 2002 - 03 . 
over the next five years , the CHST will grow by 2.5 % per year , on average , from $ 25 billion this year to over $ 28 billion in 2002 - 03 . 
the CHST is made up of a cash component and a tax point transfer . 
tax point transfers must be included when calculating the total amount . 
they increase in value over time and thus represent a growing source of revenue for provinces . 
immigration 
tracking and Detention of Unsuccessful Refugee Claimants - Government Position 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on December 9 , 1997 ) 
it is misleading to assume that 78 per cent of failed refugee claimants cannot be found anywhere in Canada or have either not been or cannot be removed . 
some failed refugee claimants who are subject to effective removal orders cannot be removed due to the existence of a statutory prohibition against their removal from Canada or a Court order prohibiting Citizenship and Immigration Canada from executing the removal order . 
in other words , removal cannot legally occur until the statutory prohibitions or court orders expire . 
statutory prohibitions against removal are set out in the Immigration Act . 
these include prohibitions against the removal of failed refugee claimants who are pursuing an application to the Federal Court for judicial review of the negative refugee determination , and against removal of failed claimants who have pending applications for membership in the Post - Determination Refugee Claimants in Canada ( PDRCC ) class . 
in addition , given that Canada does not have exit controls , there may a good number of failed claimants who have already left the country but who have not confirmed their departure . 
existing provisions in the Immigration Act provide that a person may be detained for the following reasons : 
there are reasonable grounds to believe the person poses a danger to the public ; 
there are reasonable grounds to believe the person would not appear for the examination , inquiry or proceeding in relation to the decision or for removal from Canada ; 
a person is unable to satisfy an immigration officer with respect to that person ' s identity ; or 
the department is also revising its detention guidelines to encourage a more strategic use of resources while maintaining the safety and security of the public . 
it is important to note that Citizenship and Immigration Canada does not normally detain refugee claimants or persons determined to be convention refugees unless the person is a danger to the public . 
in some cases , failed refugee claimants who have exhausted all recourse are detained prior to removal from Canada . 
CIC has three detention centers located in Mississauga , Laval and Vancouver . 
immigration detention centers are minimum security facilities that provide for the detention of persons who have demonstrated a low security risk and who have a non - violent background . 
persons considered high security risks and those who have demonstrated violent backgrounds would normally be detained at a provincially run institution . 
detention Facilities for Refugee Claimants - Request for Particulars 
the number of detainees fluctuates ( frequently for example , non - claimants are detained for 48 hrs and then removed ) and CIC does not differentiate between detainees who are refugee claimants and non - claimants when keeping track of the overall numbers . 
these three regions account for approximately 94 % of total detention . 
in all other areas , we detain at facilities owned and operated by provincial governments . 
for their services , we are charged a per diem rate , which varies between provinces . 
provincial detention centers are also used in areas where we lease facilities for cases requiring a higher level of security than we are able to provide in our immigration holding centers . 
in fiscal year 1996 - 97 , the department of Citizenship and Immigration detained 6,401 persons for a total of 138,481 detention days and at a cost of $ 20,490,132 . 
fisheries and Oceans 
negotiations on Multilateral Agreement on Investment - Continuation of Limit on Foreign Ownership of Commercial Licences - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. G é rald J . Comeau on December 9 , 1997 ) 
canada has tabled a draft reservation to the Multilateral Agreement on Investment ( MAI ) that will allow the government to maintain a 49 percent foreign - ownership limit on companies that hold commercial fishing licenses in Canada . 
this reservation preserves the discretionary authority of the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans to issue commercial fishing licenses pursuant to the Fisheries Act and the Coastal Fisheries Protection Act . 
foreign fishing vessels are prohibited from fishing in Canada ' s 200 - mile Exclusive Economic Zone unless they are authorised to do so under a license issued by the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans . 
canada has tabled another reservation preserving the authority of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans to grant port privileges only to fishing vessels from countries with which Canada maintains favourable fishing relations , based primarily on adherence by those countries to Canadian and international conservation practises and policies . 
these reservations are the same as those Canada secured under the NAFTA . 
since the outset of the negotiations , Canadian officials have been consulting extensively with the provinces , the private sector and other organisations . 
specific industry sectors have been consulted primarily through the sectoral advisory groups on international trade ( SAGIT ) . 
the Minister for International Trade has written to the chairs of all SAGITs , including the Fish and Seafood Products SAGIT , seeking their views on Canada ' s approach in the MAI negotiations . 
canada ' s position in the MAI negotiations respecting the fishing industry is best seen in light of Canada ' s overall negotiating objective which is to secure the same rights and obligations that Canada exchanged with the United States and Mexico under the NAFTA . 
federal - Provincial Relations 
reduction in Transfer Payments to Atlantic Provinces Equal to Increase in Social Transfers - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Brenda M. Robertson on December 9 , 1997 ) 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer ( CHST ) will increase in Atlantic Canada next year and the year after and every year in fact as far as projections are available , out to 2002 - 03 . 
fiscal progress means the federal government can now re - invest in priority spending such as health and education . 
the increase in the CHST cash floor from $ 11 billion to $ 12.5 billion is the largest single reinvestment made by the federal government . 
it represents close to $ 7 billion more over 6 years for provincial governments - all provinces will get more money . The 
CHST will grow by 2.5 % per year , on average , over the next five years - from $ 25 billion this year to $ 28 billion in 2002 - 03 ( cash and tax transfer ) . 
plus , the higher cash floor is being put in place one year earlier than previously announced - it begins in 1997 - 98 and gives the provinces an extra $ 143 million this year . 
human Rights 
united Nations Committees - Possible Change in Government Policies - Government Position 
( response to questions raised by Hon. No ë l A . Kinsella and Hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk on December 10 , 1997 ) 
canada is party to the six principal United Nations human rights treaties and submits regular reports to the UN committees responsible for overseeing their implementation . 
every five years , Canada reports on progress made in realizing the rights contained in the Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights . 
input was also requested from interested Canadian non - governmental organizations during preparation of the document . 
in the normal course of events , we would have expected to present this report in 1999 or 2000 because of the lengthy backlog of reports for consideration by the Committee on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights . 
however , the Committee , in response to a request from Canadian non - governmental organizations who object to the introduction of the Canada Health and Social Transfer , agreed to early consideration of Canada ' s report . 
after a careful review of the situation , Canada concluded that there are no special circumstances which require early consideration of Canada ' s report by the Committee . 
early consideration is only justified when there are sudden changes or exceptional circumstances in a country ' s situation which require immediate attention . 
last year the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) human development report again rated Canada the best country in the world in which to live . 
this is not the sign of a social situation which demands immediate attention . 
although Canada does not agree with this Committee ' s procedural decision , the government has continued to seek ways to cooperate and find an acceptable solution . 
canada strongly supports the work of the UN treaty committees . 
further discussions have led to a satisfactory compromise regarding when Canada will appear before the committee , now scheduled for the session 16 November to 4 December 1998 . 
in response to the request by Senator Kinsella , here follows correspondence from Andrew McAlister , Charge d ' affaires of the Permanent Mission of Canada to the United Nations in Geneva to Philip Alston , Chairperson of the Committee for Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , on this topic . 
it would be inappropriate for the government to provide letters originating from another organization . 
canada has always taken its obligations under human rights treaties very seriously and will continue to do so . Submitting reports is an important part of that process , and Canada has fulfilled that obligation . 
October 13 , 1997 
Mr. Philip Alston 
chairperson 
committee on Economic , 
social and Cultural Rights 
1211 Geneva 10 
dear Mr. Alston , 
i am writing further to your letter of May 27 , 1997 , regarding Canada ' s third periodic report to the Committee on Economic , Social , and Cultural Rights . 
in your letter you indicated that the Committee intends to consider Canada ' s third periodic report at its eighteenth session , in the spring of 1998 . However , it has been brought to my attention that under the normal , established procedures this report would be considered no earlier than 1999 . 
after a careful review of the situation , Canada has concluded that there are no special circumstances which might necessitate early consideration of Canada ' s report by the Committee . 
given this , and taking into account our other reporting obligations at this time , I must inform you that Canada is not prepared to appear before the Committee at its eighteenth session . 
naturally , we will be happy to present our report at a time consistent with the regular , established procedures of the Committee . 
yours sincerely , 
Mr. Philip Aliston 
chairperson 
committee on Economic , Social 
and Cultural Rights 
c / o Office of the UN High Commissioner 
for Human Rights 
ch 1211 Geneva 10 
dear Mr. Alston , 
we look forward to receiving the list of issues to be addressed in the presentation of the report following the May 18 to 22 , 1998 meeting of the Committee ' s pre - sessional Working Group . 
yours sincerely , 
human Rights 
APEC Summit - Domination by Trade and Economic Issues - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on December 10 , 1997 ) 
chief Gail Sparrow had an unprecedented opportunity to personally greet every Leader entering the Museum . 
she was the only person other than the Prime Minister to do so . 
agreement had been reached that the length of Chief Sparrow ' s remarks was to be 4 to 6 minutes . 
when the ceremony was rehearsed the day before , Chief Sparrow ' s remarks took 12 minutes . 
it was on this basis that the remarks were removed from the programme . 
the prayer was also removed from the programme , due to last - minute time constraints . 
these decisions are unrelated to the content of Chief Sparrow ' s remarks . 
in fact , the Leaders ' Declaration contains language that reflects the links between economic development and the well - being of people and the responsibility of Leaders to be accountable to their population . 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development 
agreement on International Humane Trapping Standards - Provision for Industrial Adjustment Program - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on December 12 , 1997 ) 
the Agreement on International Trapping Standards , which has been signed by Canada and the European Union and will soon be signed by the Russian Federation , commits the parties to make certain changes to their wildlife regulations and to carry out trap research / testing of commonly used traps against the new humane standards . 
canada has agreed to immediately ban " conventional steel - jawed leghold restraining traps " for seven fur - bearing species and for another five species over the next three years from the date of final ratification of the Agreement . 
the parties also are obligated to test the most commonly used traps for the listed species ( 19 in total ) over the next five years , and to then phase out those traps which fail to meet the new humane standards . 
the Department of Human Resources and Development , the department responsible for industrial adjustment programs , is negotiating with the Fur Institute of Canada to enter into the development of Occupational Standards for trappers ( either Aboriginal or non - Aboriginal ) in adjusting to the regulatory / technical ( traps ) changes which might come about as a result of the Agreement . 
a research phase could be looked at in order to bring all the partners to the table and to look at all the profiles already developed . 
this will also determine whether such a program will be needed and the time framing for the development . 
DIAND has committed funding to support consultations between national / regional Aboriginal groups , and between them and the provincial / territorial governments on what the Agreement entails , what governments are obligated to do , and then as the research results start to emerge , what changes are likely to be required ( if any ) in both trapping regulations and practices . 
national Defence 
Manitoba - SOWIND Air Crash at Little Grand Rapids - Response of Rescue Team - Availability of Necessary Equipment - Request for Departmental Statement 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Terry Stratton and Hon. Janis Johnson on December 12 , 1997 ) 
the search and rescue ( SAR ) response during SAR SOWIND was organized by controllers at the Rescue Coordination Centre ( RCC ) in Trenton , Ontario . 
additionally , because this accident had the potential to be a major air disaster ( ie . an incident involving a large number of victims ) , an emergency operations centre was established at 1 Canadian Air Division Headquarters in Winnipeg in the event that a larger military response was needed . 
the SOWIND accident took place at an airfield where there was an immediate and effective community response . 
by the time the Hercules aircraft arrived from Winnipeg with nine SAR para - rescue personnel and a medical team on board , the situation had been stabilized . 
the two Griffon helicopters from Cold Lake also encountered severe weather that delayed their arrival . 
a decision was made that the Labrador helicopter from Trenton would not be launched because it had to travel nearly 500 miles further ( about 5 - 6 hours longer ) than the Griffon helicopters as well as attempt to fly through worse weather . 
it is important to note that a response to a SAR incident does not always require the use of Canadian Forces aircraft . 
in fact , of the over 7,000 SAR cases coordinated each year by Canada ' s three Rescue Coordination Centres , Canadian Forces aircraft only participate in roughly 20 % . 
in other incidents , the RCCs will use other federal resources ( primarily Canadian Coast Guard ) , volunteer groups , or contracted services . 
a civilian helicopter was not hired for SAR SOWIND because the crew of the Hercules advised that the weather conditions at Little Grand Rapids were so severe that a helicopter would have extreme difficulty flying into the site . 
the RCC controllers , therefore , determined that they could be putting a civilian helicopter crew at undue risk if they chartered one . 
the final result of SAR SOWIND must also be assessed . 
no lives were lost because Canadian Forces aircraft did not arrive at the crash site earlier . 
a civilian helicopter penetrated the poor weather to land at Little Grand Rapids nineteen hours after the crash ( 90 minutes before the Hercules landed ) and air - evacuated two ambulatory survivors . 
the Hercules evacuated the remaining nine survivors plus one more patient , an urgent dialysis case . 
2 . The basing of Canadian Forces primary SAR aircraft is tied to historical SAR incident locations and their severity . Less 
then 10 % of SAR cases , which include marine and humanitarian assistance incidents as well as air incidents , take place in the Prairie Region . 
in fact , nearly 80 % of SAR cases are marine - related . 
thus most SAR aircraft are located near the coasts or near the Great Lakes . 
there has always been a SAR squadron located in the Prairies and it has served the region very well . 
435 Squadron , which moved from Edmonton to Winnipeg in 1994 , has the same fixed - wing capability and equipment as the other three fixed - wing SAR squadrons in Canada . 
additionally , every Canadian Forces aircraft can be used to assist in a SAR mission . 
in the Prairie Region , 417 Squadron in Cold Lake has Griffon helicopters and SAR specialists . These 
rescue personnel can also serve as crew with other Canadian Forces aircraft , including with the Griffon helicopters from 408 Squadron , Edmonton or with the Twin Otters from 440 Squadron , Yellowknife . 
federal - Provincial Relations 
Quebec - Proportion of Taxes Raised Controlled by Province - Request for Particulars 
( response to question raised by Hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein on December 12 , 1997 ) 
this percentage is based on the 1995 Statistics Canada Provincial Economic Accounts which indicates the most recent information available on the tax revenues raised in the province of Quebec by each level of administration . 
the Environment 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Commitment Made at Kyoto Conference - Consultations Between Prime Minister and Provincial Premiers on Ratification - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Lowell Murray on December 12 , 1997 ) 
first Ministers had a fulsome discussion on the issue of climate change at their meeting in mid - December . 
they undertook to work together on implementing the Kyoto agreement and directed Energy and Environment Ministers to " work together to consider jointly the appropriate course of action to establish a process , in advance of Canada ' s ratification of the Kyoto Protocol , that will examine the consequences of Kyoto and provide for full participation of provincial and territorial governments with the federal government in any implementation and management of the Protocol . " 
at their meeting on January 29 - 30 , Environment Ministers also agreed that the federal government should take a leadership role on a joint analysis of impacts , and that all jurisdictions will commit the resources necessary to complete this joint analysis . 
provinces did express concern that the federal government did not adopt the " consensus " position of stabilization of greenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels by 2010 . 
however , they were aware that the purpose of the Regina meeting was to provide advice on the final negotiating position , and that establishment of this position was a federal responsibility . 
the federal government considered the views of the provinces , plus the positioning of the international community in formulating the final negotiating position . 
at this time , it is presumed that Canada will ratify the Kyoto agreement . 
two important considerations will be the development of an effective domestic implementation plan , and the actions of major trading partners with respect to ratification and implementation of measures to meet their commitments . 
the challenge now turns to developing an appropriate policy framework with the federal government ' s partners - the provinces and industry - that encourages energy efficiency and innovation , and enables Canadians to take action on climate change in a way that benefits both the environment and our economy . 
this work is underway . 
transport 
further Imposition of Tolls on Trans - Canada Highway 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on December 15 , 1997 ) 
under the Canadian Constitution , highway matters are a provincial responsibility . 
transport Canada ' s only involvement in Highway 104 was to match , dollar for dollar , $ 55 million with the province ( $ 27.5 million each ) . 
the remaining funds were provided by a bond issue to Highway 104 Western Alignment Corporation . 
since highways are a provincial responsibility , there is no requirement for the provinces to inform the federal government of any plans they may have of introducing tolls on their highways . 
nevertheless , it is the federal government ' s understanding that besides the Confederation Bridge and Highway 104 in Nova Scotia , the only other planned toll section of the Trans - Canada Highway is the proposed new section of highway between Fredericton and Moncton , in New Brunswick . 
solicitor General 
publication on Internet of Hate Propaganda and Child Pornography - Public Consultations - Request for Information 
( response to question raised by Hon. Brenda M. Robertson on December 15 , 1997 ) 
federal - Provincial - Territorial Ministers Responsible for Justice discussed the issue of child pornography and hate propaganda on the Internet . 
ministers agreed that this was an area which warranted close attention . 
industry Canada is working with the Canadian Association of Internet Providers ( CAIP ) in developing a voluntary code of conduct that addresses the issue of offensive content ( obscene and hate materials ) and the safety of children . 
under consideration is a Code of Conduct that would be pro - active and provide for public education and awareness measures . 
two milestones on this issue will soon be reached . 
in March 1998 , the OECD is hosting a forum on self - regulation , in Paris , and the federal government will be represented . 
in October 1998 , there is a OECD Ministerial Conference on Electronic Commerce , in Ottawa , and the issue of offensive content is expected to be on the agenda . 
canada ' s criminal legislation dealing with obscenity , pornography , and hate - propaganda already applies the appropriate offences when computers or other hi - tech media are used to create , import or distribute such materials in the same way as when other methods are used . 
the Supreme Court has held that transboundary offences can be prosecuted in Canada if any significant part of the offence took place here ( R . v. Libman , 1985 ) . 
the agenda is currently focused on ensuring that mutual legal assistance and extradition instruments apply to these crimes . 
ministers also asked officials to develop multilateral principles governing the investigation and prosecution of trans - boundary " hi - tech " offences . 
the Eight is also actively working on setting standards for the training of law - enforcement officials and the production of computer evidence in court in order to facilitate multi - jurisdictional investigations and prosecutions . 
minister ' s Report and Annual Statement on Organized Crime - Seniors Victims of Telemarketing Fraud - Request for Clarification 
the Solicitor General has indicated that he considers this to be a very important issue within the context of the overall fight against organized crime , because many frauds are carried out by organized groups operating within and outside Canada . 
it is a serious crime which plays upon the vulnerable members of our society . 
the Government has been involved in numerous initiatives aimed at fighting criminal telemarketing and other fraudulent activity . 
for example , the Canada - United States Binational Group on Telemarketing Fraud was created by Prime Minister Chr é tien and President Clinton following their meeting in April 1997 . 
one of the many recommendations from the Group is that governments work closely with other interested groups in developing and disseminating educational materials , and on coordinating education and prevention efforts . 
the Deceptive Telemarketing Prevention Forum , chaired by Industry Canada , includes members from federal and provincial law enforcement agencies and private industry . 
two of the key objectives of this Forum are to educate the public about deceptive and fraudulent telemarketing practices , and to suggest measures that members of the public can employ to avoid being victimized . 
in addition , the Government has contributed , through the Royal Canadian Mounted Police , to the production of a video entitled " Scams . " 
the video is aimed at educating people about telemarketing fraud , and is currently being shown on television stations in Ontario and British Columbia . 
the Environment 
reduction in Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Ratification of Undertakings made at Kyoto - Commitment Related to Position of United States - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Lowell Murray on December 16 , 1997 ) 
the ratification of the Kyoto agreement must be authorized by the Federal Cabinet through an Order - in - Council . 
Canadian practice is for the federal government to ratify a treaty only after it is assured that Canada can meet its obligations under the treaty . 
the federal government will not ratify the Kyoto Agreement without broad - based support , without a clear path to implementation and without extensive involvement of provincial and territorial partners . 
a process will be established prior to ratification to provide for full participation of provincial and territorial governments with the federal government in any implementation and management of the Agreement . 
canada will also monitor what its major trading partners are doing to ratify and implement the Kyoto Agreement . 
treasury Board 
millennium Computer Phenomenon - Effect on Government Computers - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Fernand Roberge on December 16 , 1997 ) 
treasury Board considers the Year 2000 issue to be a high priority and has formulated an aggressive action plan to ensure compliance of key systems across government . 
the government has completed two surveys of all departments and agencies . 
the latest survey indicates that all departments are now 100 % aware of the Year 2000 problem and of its impact on their IT environment and service delivery . 
the role of the Year 2000 Project Office within Treasury Board Secretariat is to provide leadership and assistance to departments to help them accomplish Year 2000 priorities and conversion work . 
computer systems that support delivery of key services - those that are concerned with the health , safety , security and economic well being of Canadians - are the government ' s top priority . 
the loss or interruption of any of these systems , even for a short period , is unacceptable . 
in March of 1997 , the Treasury Board Secretariat contacted all Deputy Ministers and agency heads to assess the progress made so far in preparing for Year 2000 . 
they were asked to provide information on critical systems , external interfaces and system dependencies , the price tag for fixing their computers , and their funding and staff requirements . 
responses showed that most departments were making reasonable progress . 
the remaining departments were encouraged to accelerate their efforts . 
a report by the Auditor General in October expressed concern about the level of preparation by government departments . 
the Auditor General ' s report was based on the assessment of only a small number of departments ( 9 ) and examined the situation as of April 1997 . 
a great deal of progress has been made since then . 
preparation for the changeover continues to be a standing item on the agenda of Deputy Ministers ' meetings . 
in addition , the CIO Year 2000 Project Office has accelerated the pace of its government wide efforts . 
nevertheless , the average completion rate for all departments surveyed was 44 per cent . 
according to the industry benchmark , a large organization should have completed 45 per cent of its conversion work by now to have a reasonable expectation of meeting the Year 2000 deadline . 
because departments differ in size and the extent to which they depend on information technology , the rate of progress within government varies . 
three quarters of the departments offering the most vital services have completed or nearly completed their inventories . 
more than half have developed plans covering the complete scope of Year 2000 problems , and all departments have formal plans in place . 
the CIO Year 2000 Project Office is working on common , horizontal initiatives for departments . 
these efforts include : 
- a dedicated procurement office that has been set up at Public Works and Government Services Canada ( PWGSC ) . 
a Request for Proposal ( RFP ) has been developed , in consultation with the private sector , to secure resources for government departments . 
the new initiatives developed will also expedite the procurement process for departments by at least 8 weeks . 
- steps that are being taken in collaboration with the private sector to ensure that the government can obtain the skilled technical and human resources required . 
in a reversal of normal procedures , qualified students at technical institutions are receiving conditional offers of employment . 
the establishment of government - wide testing facilities . 
- the examination of over 2,500 software and hardware products used throughout government by PWGSC who will have a repository of over 5,000 products by spring of 1998 . 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Possibility of Subsidies for Building Spu Pipelines to Additional Areas of the maritime Provinces - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Eymard G . Corbin on December 16 , 1997 ) 
canada ' s energy policies have evolved significantly over the last decade since the North American deregulation of oil and natural gas prices . 
current energy policy is based on allowing market forces to work . 
although the construction of natural gas pipelines is subject to the necessary federal or provincial regulatory approvals , the federal government does not determine which projects are ultimately constructed . 
to this end , studies are being undertaken , by commercial interests , to determine to what extent natural gas could be used in various regions of eastern Canada . 
the results of these studies will dictate the pace at which secondary natural gas pipelines will be developed . 
as in other regions in Canada where natural gas was introduced , the construction of the Maritimes & Northeast pipeline will undoubtably serve as the impetus to the development of a natural gas distribution networks where natural gas has a competitive advantage over other energy sources . 
government assistance to construct natural gas infrastructure in the 1980 s was one of many initiatives created as part of the National Energy Program ( NEP ) . 
this program was created in an era when security of energy supply was a major concern . 
at that time , a number of programs within the NEP were designed specifically to address the energy needs of Atlantic Canada . 
fisheries 
bay of Fundy - Destruction of Infected Salmon on Fish Farms - Progress in Establishing Recovery Program for Growers - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Brenda M. Robertson on December 17 , 1997 ) 
on December 11 , 1997 , New Brunswick Minister of Fisheries and Aquaculture , the Honourable Donald D . Gay , announced measures to control Infectious Salmon Anemia ( ISA ) in farmed salmon in the Bay of Fundy . 
this included issuing an order to eradicate all 1997 year - class salmon at clinically affected cages . 
it is the federal government ' s view that the Province has acted appropriately and within its jurisdiction , given its responsibilities for controlling diseases in its fish farms , as set out in the New Brunswick Aquaculture Act . 
the federal government agrees with the Province that ISA poses no threat to human health , and would also point out that ISA poses no demonstrated risk to wild fish stocks , or to cultured stocks in other provinces . 
for these reasons , the federal government is not mandated to provide compensation for this preventive eradication action under any of its legislation ( the Fisheries Act and the Health of Animals Act ) . 
existing infrastructure support programming of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency , as well as access to financing provided by the Farm Credit Corporation , remain available to eligible salmon growers for industry recovery purposes . 
in addition , the Department of Fisheries and Oceans has dedicated over $ 100 K in the 1997 - 98 fiscal year to scientific research on the ISA problem , and will continue to provide scientific research services to salmon growers . 
health 
request for Funding to Develop Vaccine for Flesh - east Disease - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Stanley Haidasz on December 18 , 1997 ) 
Dr. Maxwell Richter , Chief of Immunology , Ottawa Civic hospital has written to a former Minister of Health ( Diane Marleau ) on two occasions ( August 16 , 1995 and October 25 , 1995 ) . 
the Department is committed to an action plan to address this problem . 
in fact , a Consensus Conference on " Controlling Antimicrobial Resistance : 
health Canada in conjunction with the Canadian Infectious Disease Society organized the meeting held in Montreal . 
approximately 200 participants represented a wide constituency of stakeholders including the consumer , professional organizations and the media . 
the implementation of the final recommendations will result in a National Strategy to improve the benefits of antibiotics and reduce the risks associated with our current use . 
proceedings / recommendations of the conference have been tabled in the Senate . 
fisheries 
bay of Fundy - Destruction of Infected Salmon on Fish Farms - Arrangements for Control of Outbreak - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Janis Johnson on December 18 , 1997 ) 
on December 11 , 1997 , New Brunswick Minister of Fisheries and Aquaculture , the Honourable Donald D . Gay , announced measures to control Infectious Salmon Anemia ( ISA ) in farmed salmon in the Bay of Fundy . 
this included issuing an order to eradicate all 1997 year - class salmon at clinically affected cages . 
it is the federal government ' s view that the Province has acted appropriately and within its jurisdiction , given its responsibilities for controlling diseases in its fish farms , as set out in the New Brunswick Aquaculture Act . 
it is too soon to tell whether the Province ' s control measures have worked . 
however , when used in combination with other measures such as separation of salmon year classes and disinfection of slaughterhouse effluents , eradication has proved effective in arresting similar outbreaks in Norway . 
there is no evidence that this outbreak is occurring in other parts of Atlantic Canada . 
however , there are reports that salmon growers in the State of Maine are finding evidence of ISA in some of their operations . 
the federal government agrees with the Province that ISA poses no threat to human health , and would also point out that ISA poses no demonstrated risk to wild fish stocks or to cultured stocks in other provinces . 
for these reasons , the federal government is not mandated to provide compensation for this preventive eradication action under any of its legislation ( the Fisheries Act , and the Health of Animals Act ) . 
existing infrastructure support programming of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency , as well as access to financing provided by the Farm Credit Corporation , remain available to eligible salmon growers for industry recovery purposes . 
in addition , the Department of Fisheries and Oceans has dedicated over $ 100 K in the 1997 - 98 fiscal year to scientific research on the ISA problem , and will continue to provide scientific research services to salmon growers . 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Possible Extension into New Brunswick and Quebec - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Eymard G . Corbin on December 18 , 1997 ) 
the Government of New Brunswick has not formally indicated its intent to seek federal subsidies to representatives of the federal Government . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
transport - Pearson Airport - Ex Gratia Payment to Goudge S 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 1 on the Order Paper - by Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
energy - Department of Asia - Pacific - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 4 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Business Development Bank of Canada - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 7 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Canada Post - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 9 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Correctional Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 12 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of Foreign Affairs - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 17 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of Human Resources Development - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 21 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of Latin America and Africa - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 28 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Royal Canadian Mounted Police - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 40 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - National Museum of Science and Technology - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 42 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of the Solicitor General - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 44 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of Children and Youth - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 47 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of National Defence - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 55 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
national Defence - Equipment to be Mothballed or Scrapped 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 64 on the Order Paper - by Senator Forrestall . 
national Defence - Canadian Forces Aircrew Personnel Shortfalls 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 65 on the Order Paper - by Senator Forrestall . 
national Defence - Surplus Artillery Ammunition Transferred to Turkey 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 72 on the Order Paper - by Senator Forrestall . 
energy - Restrictions to the Transportation of plutonium and MOX fuel 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 80 on the Order Paper - by Senator Spivak . 
orders OF THE DAY 
excise Tax Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I rise today to begin debate on second reading of Bill S - 10 , to amend the Excise Tax Act . 
as you are probably well aware , Canada is one of the few industrialized countries that taxes reading material . 
the United States has no such system , nor do Australia , Great Britain or Japan . 
it is my hope that Canada will soon join these other countries and follow the lead of the European Parliament , which banished such taxes a couple of years ago . 
honourable senators , the issue of the GST is one that has been filled with acrimony since it was proposed . 
much has been said and denied on both sides of this chamber . 
it is my hope that this bill will be allowed to escape this animosity , despite what has been said in the past . 
in this vein , my remarks will not be partisan , for my intention is not political . 
my objective is to appeal to common sense , to good politics . 
we have told Canadians that we oppose taxing reading material and that we would like to see it stopped . 
we owe it to ourselves to act on that commitment . 
when I look about me today , I think I can say with a fair degree of certainty that there are few if any of us in this chamber who seriously oppose the principle of this bill . 
we know through our work and our contacts within our respective communities that many people want the GST on reading material removed , so many , in fact , that I do not think I would be incorrect to suggest that a consensus has emerged in this country in favour of such an action . 
i do not mean a consensus among interested parties only . 
obviously groups directly affected by the tax , such as the Association of Canadian Publishers , the Canadian Booksellers Association and the Canadian Daily Newspapers Association , all support the idea . 
however , those groups alone do not make a national consensus . 
for this you need people , lots of them . 
i think such a group of people exists . 
they are from all walks of life and every part of Canada . 
they are people who have stated repeatedly , " Yes , we can live with a broad - based consumption tax , but , no , we are opposed to taxing reading material . " 
the desire of these many Canadians to see the GST on reading material removed has been echoed here in Ottawa . 
members of all parties have , at different times and to different degrees , endorsed the idea . 
more important , at this particular juncture of our national history , the Liberal Party , indeed the entire Liberal family , clearly supports the idea . 
in 1992 , the Prime Minister , then leader of the Liberal Party , wrote the Don ' t Tax Reading Coalition . 
in his letter he reiterated his party ' s recent policy resolution calling for the removal of the GST on reading material . 
i am extremely happy to see that the honourable senator still feels strongly about this issue , and I hope that she will vote for this bill . 
i am equally hopeful that Senator Corbin , now that his previous objections have been overcome , will see fit to vote in favour of it . 
in addition to the Prime Minister , members of his cabinet and Liberal senators , there is the Liberal caucus . 
i read recently that over one - half of the previous caucus was on record as supporting the principle enunciated in this bill . 
it seems unlikely that these numbers have changed drastically since the last election . 
of course , there are also Liberal premiers like Brian Tobin . 
the Premier of Newfoundland is a strong supporter of removing the GST from reading material . 
i seem to remember he was particularly eloquent on speaking about this issue , saying something to the effect that taxing reading was a violation of the concept of freedom of speech . 
i would be very surprised if he has since changed his mind . 
last , but not least , are the different liberal newspapers in this country . 
i am certain that The Toronto Star and other papers have printed any number of articles and editorials in favour of abolishing the GST on reading material . 
honourable senators , when you add it all up , support for this bill is quite widespread . 
for the longest time , Mr. Martin told Canadians that to chop the GST on reading material would be too expensive . 
he said it would cost the treasury something in the area of $ 140 million , and that we simply could not afford it . 
however , as I pointed out before , and as the Auditor General points out every year , $ 140 million is easily found when boondoggles and political spending are properly controlled . 
Mr. Martin ' s arguments are further undermined by the close attention he has paid to lowering the country ' s deficit . 
for the first time in many years , Canadians are seeing the light at the end of the deficit tunnel . 
i do not wish to get into a long and detailed description of the economic benefits of abolishing the GST on reading material . 
i am sure most of you are aware of all of these . 
suffice it to say that , as it stands now , the GST on reading material is a tax both on reading and on learning ; therefore it is a tax on investment . 
this is never a good idea . 
it is also , in some ways , a tax on jobs . 
eliminating the GST on reading material will bring increased sales to a host of businesses , including magazine publishers , printing companies and bookstores . 
this means more jobs ; jobs for the , unfortunately , still high number of unemployed , particularly among the young . 
a further point I should like to make concerns literacy or the lack thereof . 
a recent OECD study indicates that 42 per cent of Canadians are presently below minimum literacy standards . 
an additional 34 per cent can only use simple reading material . 
in the Maritimes , as Senator DeWare advised before Christmas , illiteracy rates are 20 per cent higher than the national averages . 
in Ontario , something called the International Adult Literacy Survey has shown that 20 per cent of the province ' s adults have no basic literacy skills , and an additional 24 per cent have poor skills . 
i am sure you will all agree that these figures are startling . 
they should give all of us pause to reflect , and to ask ourselves what it means when over one - third of our fellow citizens have difficulty reading . 
we should be asking ourselves what are the consequences , who are the losers , and what can be done to rectify the situation . 
questions like these and the statistics that provoke them underline the fact that literacy is not simply a question of how much tax is applied to books or magazines , nor is it just about who can or cannot read . 
in reality , it is a far more wide - ranging issue , one directly linked to our economic self - interest . 
broadly speaking , this is because literacy affects our productivity . 
it affects our competitiveness . 
it influences our ability to do business successfully in the global economy . 
in short , an uneducated or undereducated workforce is an impediment to our progress and a drag on our national economic well - being . 
it is therefore vital that we ensure that our fellow citizens know how to read . 
here we get to the crux of the issue . 
if we wish to encourage people to read more , we must ensure that they have easy and affordable access to reading material . 
it makes good sense . 
we must stop taxing those materials that they use most , whether it be newspapers , magazines , books , or other reading material . 
this is particularly true for our youth . 
young people are our future . 
they are our single most important asset . 
for them , far more than was the case for our generation , literacy is crucial to a successful life and a profitable career , largely because our economy has evolved . 
today , it is based on service and technology . 
each of these areas demands a high rate of literacy and the ability to think and write clearly and coherently . 
i hardly need remind you of the important role reading plays in the acquisition of these skills . 
if we are to encourage our young people to read and keep reading , then we must ensure that they have access to the materials they need at affordable prices . 
i would summarize my remarks by saying that taxes , consumption or otherwise , are a necessary evil . 
they provide for the many services we have and need in our society . 
however , taxes on reading material should be exempt from this general rule . 
this is no longer the case , as I mentioned a moment ago . 
in any case , it is not a question of affordability ; it is one of spending priorities . 
the removal of the GST from reading material is , or should be , a priority . 
it makes economic sense . 
equally important , literate citizens make for a better and more informed democracy , and that is a goal towards which we can all strive , independent of partisanship . 
i should like to conclude by urging honourable senators opposite to give concrete expression to their public support and their party ' s long - standing promise regarding this issue . 
let us send a strong message to the Minister of Finance that removal of the GST on reading material should be one of the first dividends Canadians receive from the elimination of the deficit . 
i urge you to show your commitment to literacy and to the future well - being of the young people in our country by voting in favour of this bill . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Adams , debate adjourned . 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kelly , seconded by the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme , P . C . : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to hear evidence on and consider matters relating to the security intelligence operations of the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the extent to which the recommendations of the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and the Public Safety ( June 1987 ) and the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and the Public Safety ( June 1989 ) have been addressed thus far by the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the adequacy of the review or oversight of the Government of Canada ' s security and intelligence apparatus , including each of the organizations in departments of government that conduct security and intelligence operations or that have a security and intelligence mandate ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to intra - governmental and inter - governmental co - ordination relating to the Government of Canada ' s security intelligence mandate and operations ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the overall mandate and current threat assessment capability of the Government of Canada ' s security intelligence apparatus and of the individual organizations therein ; 
that seven Senators , to be designated at a later date , act as members of the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to report from time to time , to send for persons , papers and records , and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; and 
that the Committee present its final report no later than April 15 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I believe it is possible for me to do what I am about to do . 
i should like to adjourn further debate on this motion until Tuesday - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Kelly , if you do that , you preclude any other senator from speaking . 
this is your motion . 
senator Kelly : 
honourable senators , there are reasons why it would not be possible for this matter to be discussed before the week of March 3 . 
i am persuaded that if I can adjourn the order at this stage , then the numbers do not move from 8 to 15 , which they will do before March 3 . 
this would put the order in limbo until March 3 . 
if you feel I am fully out of order , please consult the Deputy Clerk , because he is the one who has told me to do this . 
senator Carstairs : 
since this order now stands adjourned in my name , perhaps it would be possible for me to ask the Senate if we could adjourn debate on this motion until March 3 ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debated adjourned . 
reports on Social and Economic Development 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella rose pursuant to notice of December 4 , 1997 : 
honourable senators , I should like to say a few words , and then I will adjourn the debate on this inquiry . 
honourable senators , the particular report to which I wish to call the attention of the Senate is a report that Canada has submitted to the United Nations pursuant to the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights . 
that report constitutes the manner in which Canada meets its obligation under that international human rights treaty . 
this particular report , and a number of other reports that Canada submits to international bodies to which we are members , are excellent reports in many instances . 
however , unfortunately , very few Canadians are aware of those reports . 
last fall , a number of the members of this house joined with members from the other place in participating as Canadian parliamentarians in a hemispheric conference of parliamentarians that was held in Quebec City . 
at the end of the conference , which had as one of its themes the study of the protection and the promotion of human rights in the hemisphere , we took note of the fact that many of the countries - indeed , all of the countries of the hemisphere - are parties to one or another of these international human rights treaties which require the state party to submit a report . 
the Quebec conference of the hemisphere agreed that we , in our respective countries and Parliaments , should give attention to the reports that our own countries are submitting to these oversight committees . 
this particular report is a very important report . 
it is speaks to and provides a detailed analysis of the steps that Canada has taken , whether federally , provincially or territorially , to meet its obligations in the area of economic , social and cultural rights . 
we do the same thing ; we submit a country report with the collaboration of all the provinces and the two territories , under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . 
honourable senators , this particular report that we submit periodically is especially important when one considers that economic , social and cultural rights , such as the right to education or the right to health , require the intervention of the state , whereas rights such as freedom from arbitrary arrest or freedom of the press , in effect , are self - executory . 
what they require is that the state or people in power do not interfere with those rights in order for them to be enjoyed . 
this report , on social , economic and cultural rights in Canada , on issues such as what steps we have taken to promote or guarantee to give meaning to the right to education , is a report prepared by the provinces , territories and also a section prepared by the federal government . 
it is an excellent view of the situation ; of the progress that Canada has made , all the partners in our confederation , towards the fulfilment and the giving of greater meaning to economic , social and cultural rights . 
that report is very much a social audit . 
just as we have an audit in fiscal matters , the report of the Auditor General is only as good as the debate that it stimulates in the House of Commons or in this place . 
being also a social audit , this model of soft justiciability is nevertheless a method of implementation , promotion and protection . 
it is important that we begin to look at these reports that Canada is submitting . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
leave having been given to return to Government Order No. 2 : 
honourable senators , it is a pleasure to speak to you today on a bill that will prepare maritime transport in Canada to face the challenges of the 21 st century . 
this bill is the result of two and a half years of major consultations with shippers , carriers , other levels of government and commercial associations . 
it has considerable support from the marine transport sector . 
the bill is being reintroduced as a priority of the government after undergoing a number of major changes in the last legislature in response to suggestions and concerns expressed by the various partners . 
this legislation provides a new outlook and direction for many of our key marine institutions and facilities . 
the government ' s objective is to strengthen the Canadian economy and to establish a climate favouring job creation and investment . 
only with a solid economic base will we be able to maintain the living standard we have taken for granted . 
in support of this goal , the government has taken steps to modernize Canada ' s transportation network . 
to this end , it has commercialized transport activities , eliminated useless subsidies and changed legislation . 
in all forms of transport - air , surface and marine - we have made great progress toward greater efficiency , more power to system users and greater local and regional autonomy . 
a lot has been done , but we have yet to put in place the benefits of these improvements for the marine sector . 
turning to ports , the 1995 national marine policy calls for the federal government to focus on ports that are vital to domestic and international trade , and to preserve access to remote regions . 
the remaining ports are being transferred to local interests which are in a better position to manage them efficiently and in response to local needs . 
to become a Canada Port Authority , a port must be financially self - sufficient , have diversified traffic , have strategic significance to Canada ' s trade , and have a link to a major railway line or highway . 
port authorities will be incorporated or continued by letters patent for the purpose of operating a particular port . 
they will have power to engage in activities related to shipping , navigation , transportation of passengers and goods , and handling and storage of goods , as well as other activities deemed necessary to support port operations . 
each board of directors will be composed of between seven and eleven members and will select its own chief executive officer . 
the majority of each board will be appointed by the federal government after consultation with port users . 
the remaining directors will be appointed by the municipality or municipalities adjacent to the facility , involved provinces and the Government of Canada . 
perhaps the most important accountability mechanism in the bill is the provision that representatives of ports must approach the private sector for financing . 
as a result , all port development projects requiring investment will be subject to commercial risk assessment . 
during the last Parliament the biggest change introduced by the House was to give the new port authorities crown agent status for their core activities . 
crown agent status gives port authorities a clear exemption from property taxation and would enable them to be covered by the municipal grants act . 
then they will pay grants in lieu of taxes to the municipalities at the same levels as other federal facilities and installations . 
in most cases , this represents a continuation of the status quo . 
any new obligations arising from agent status would come mainly to the federal government and not the agent . 
that is why the bill was amended to clarify the restrictions that would apply to port authorities with crown agent status . 
for example , crown agent status does not apply to non - core activities that ports may undertake . 
to make sure third parties know when they are dealing with a crown agent , the legislation requires port authorities to make this clear in all contracts signed as non - agents . 
the bill prohibits ports from borrowing as crown agents and requires them to borrow in their own name and not in the name of the crown . 
this emphasizes to lenders that the crown does not stand behind these obligations . 
the need to borrow must be justified on a commercial basis . 
turning to the issue of divestiture , most public ports administered by Ports Canada are regional ports performing operations which range from large facilities supporting significant commercial activity to small facilities with little or no commercial traffic . 
the government ' s intention over the next four years is to continue with the transfer of such ports to local management . 
at the same time , the government is sensitive to the special concerns from some sectors about the future of ports . 
many options exist for the future of ports aside from transfer to the private sector . 
provincial , municipal and community groups can develop innovative arrangements . 
the government is providing a $ 125 million port divestiture fund to facilitate the transition . 
it is important to note that the Minister of Transport will report back to Parliament every year during the transition program to explain the status of port transfers , and the minister will continue to manage all public ports that are not transferred . 
the second initiative I will address is the part of the legislation that will permit us to commercialize the operation of the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence seaway system . 
this system is a crucial waterway but it is also a business . 
the seaway faces formidable challenges , including high asset renewal costs . 
bill C - 9 enables the minister to enter into agreements with a not - for - profit corporation or any other private sector interests to operate and maintain all or part of the seaway . 
the federal government would retain regulatory control over navigation in the seaway . 
the existing seaway authority would be dissolved in due course . 
the new , not - for - profit seaway corporation would be responsible for operating and maintaining the seaway system and for asset renewal costs up to a specified limit , with incentives in place to achieve operating efficiencies and lower costs . 
transport Canada is negotiating the transfer of seaway operations with groups representing the major shippers and carriers on the seaway . 
the more efficient they are in the management , the less fees they will pay to use the seaway . 
having the users of the system performing operational and management tasks will help to make the seaway a more efficient and competitive link with our international trading partners . 
the government believes that the user - based , not - for - profit corporation is best suited to take over the system because users want to minimize their seaway tolls and ensure the long term integrity of the system . 
in particular , the steel industry and the marine carriers require the seaway for their long - term survival . 
honourable colleagues , the government also remains committed to the long term integrity of the St. Lawrence Seaway . 
safeguards in the agreement will ensure sufficient asset renewal to protect Canada ' s interest in the system . 
third , Bill C - 9 allows the Minister of Transport to improve the way pilotage authorities operate in Canada . 
this bill will make it possible for the authorities to recover their costs from those who use their services . 
it will also streamline the appeals process for new pilotage rates and provide a mechanism for settling disputes concerning the contract renewal process . 
it will also require the minister to review pilotage issues and report his findings to Parliament . 
next , human resources . 
in preparing these changes , priority was placed on ensuring that all employees affected by the changes are treated fairly , and that the appropriate Canada Labour Code requirements are observed fully . 
government has taken the position that marine employees who are now members of federal pension and benefit plans will be covered under comparable replacement arrangements when they are transferred . 
the result is that marine employees leaving the federal plans will be offered comparable benefits until such time as they and the new employer agree to changes . 
honourable senators , the bill also requires the new employer to take all reasonable steps to negotiate a pension transfer agreement with Treasury Board . 
pension transfers and pension transfer agreements would allow benefits to continue to grow as service time accumulates with the new employer . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , I should like to point out that Bill C - 9 meets the goals of the national marine policy and strikes a balance in how we manage our marine institutions and facilities . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I appreciate very much the introductory remarks of our colleague . 
we on this side look forward to getting at this bill . 
we remain somewhat disappointed and discouraged with the way in which it was handled in the other place . 
there was neither sufficient time for the calling of adequate witnesses nor for the exposure of the more sensitive parts of some of the areas upon which the senator has just now touched . 
we will want to have this bill examined , but not in all respects . 
we can certainly deal with some of its aspects because they are straightforward , and we do have a history of process and procedure with respect to them . 
however , with respect to the ports themselves , the seaway and the expansion of liability , and so on - I can think of 10 or 12 items immediately - we reserve the right to advise you at this time and to act accordingly . 
we will want the standing committee to call witnesses . 
we also reserve the right , should it be necessary - and I have a strong feeling that it will be , particularly with respect to the ports - for the standing committee to do some travel in relation to this legislation . 
the bill has been a long time in preparation . 
this bill is too important to hurry . 
it may need some recommendations for changes , but we will not know that until we have examined it , particularly in concert with the community of marine users in Canada . 
on motion of Senator Forrestall , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 37 
Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Senate 
yesterday ' s Attendance 
telecommunications 
Rogers Cablevision - Unjustified Raise in Service Charges 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
senator Andrew Thompson - Second Report of Committee Presented and Considered - Debate Adjourned 
motion in Amendment 
point of Order 
motion in Subamendment 
motion to Authorize Clerk of the Senate to Notify Senator Thompson to Appear Before Rules Committee - Debate Adjourned 
motion to Further Direct Consideration of Rules Committee - Debate Suspended 
business of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Senate 
yesterday ' s Attendance 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I am pleased to see some members of the press in the gallery today . 
as chair of the Senate Liberal caucus , as a member of the Senate and as a former broadcaster , I welcome and appreciate the interest that is being shown in our work . 
as we know , there are 104 seats in the Senate of Canada . 
currently , four are vacant . 
out of 100 sitting senators , 75 were in the chamber yesterday while 11 were holding hearings as members of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
that is , 86 senators out of 100 were present , an 86 per cent attendance rate . 
that is not the 60 per cent rate indicated by some journalists this morning . 
i thought I would set the record straight . 
telecommunications 
Rogers Cablevision - Unjustified Raise in Service Charges 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I am grappling with an illness that it takes time to cure , but the time will come . 
i would first like to thank all of you who through your expressions of sympathy , by letter , by telephone or in person , have helped me through these very difficult years . 
this disease , which has had me in its grip for nearly two years , seems to be under control . 
as you can see , there have been improvements . 
the point of my remarks today , honourable senators , is to make you aware of a situation I consider unjustifiable and unacceptable . 
Rogers Cable is going to impose unacceptable rate hikes on all its subscribers . 
this is an unjustified increase in service charges . 
in order to put a better face on things , Rogers will suspend this increase for a year if the subscriber signs up for a new group of channels which the company has dubbed MeTV . 
Rogers loses absolutely nothing in the deal . 
as you know , the Rogers monopoly is currently experiencing serious financial difficulties and it hopes to overcome those difficulties by imposing an additional charge on taxpayers . 
you will note as well that there will be only one French - language channel in this MeTV package , Canal famille . 
i have written to Ted Rogers as well as to Fran ç oise Bertrand , the Chairman of the CRTC , to protest this increase and to demand its immediate withdrawal . 
it is unacceptable and reprehensible that a monopoly like Rogers Cable can impose a surcharge after the fact . 
who is protecting the consumers ? 
we have recently learned that the minister responsible for this matter , Sheila Copps , has washed her hands of it . 
she will not interfere either . 
so whom can the consumer turn to for protection ? 
whom are we to contact ? 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
senator Andrew Thompson - Second Report of Committee Presented and Considered - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Shirley Maheu , Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
on December 16 , 1997 , the Senate ordered Senator Andrew Thompson to attend in his place when the Senate resumed sitting in February 1998 following the Christmas adjournment . 
a letter dated December 18 , 1997 , from the Clerk of the Senate , enclosing a certified true copy of this order , was personally served on Senator Thompson . 
pursuant to the terms of the December 16 , 1997 Senate order , since Senator Thompson failed to attend the Senate , the matter of his continuing absence is now referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders for the purposes of determining whether his absence constitutes a contempt of the Senate . 
the Committee is to report its findings and any possible recommendations within two weeks from the day the matter was referred to it . 
the Committee met on February 10 , 1997 , when the Senate rose , to consider this matter . 
this is based on the traditions of the Senate , and a desire that he be given every reasonable opportunity to provide an explanation or any relevant information and present reasons as to why his actions did not constitute a contempt the Senate . 
that the Honourable Senator Andrew Thompson be ordered to attend before the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders at its next meeting scheduled for Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 7:00 p.m. in Room 160 - S . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Maheu : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Edward M. Lawson : 
honourable senators , while listening to the CBC news this morning , I heard an interview with Senator Rompkey on the subject of this report . 
how does it come about that a senator can make a public announcement of a committee ' s decision and a penalty to be imposed before the committee has had the opportunity to have its hearing ? 
the constitutional experts say that this penalty is not achievable . 
is this merely Senator Rompkey pre - empting the committee , or had the committee made a decision before holding the hearing ? 
second , the Clerk of the Senate is quoted as saying that , in the fall , Senator Thompson filed with the Senate a report from his doctor which indicated that for six months Senator Thompson would not be well enough to come to the Senate . 
every other senator facing a serious medical problem has followed this same procedure in the past . 
is the committee or the Senate now challenging Senator Thompson ' s doctor ? 
are we substituting the opinion of a reporter who saw Senator Thompson walking his dog and concluded that the senator was in good health ? 
that was the reporter ' s medical opinion . 
are there any other senators on medical leave of a similar nature with medical reports from their doctors ? 
is the committee or the Senate challenging their medical reports , and if not , why not ? 
senator Maheu : 
honourable senators , no decision has been taken by the committee . 
eighteen members sat last night and listened to possibilities and legal ramifications to determine whether we have that right and to find out what is contempt of the Senate . 
the question that we were discussing last night and the reason for our letter is not the absenteeism but the contempt of the Senate . 
we are dealing strictly with that one point for now , although the committee ' s order of reference from the Senate goes a little further . 
we did not question the doctor ' s report . 
i do not think anyone on that committee would put the doctor ' s report in question . 
it was not a subject of discussion . 
doctors ' reports have been filed , but we did not put them into question last night . 
we are not challenging them at all , and as far as I know , no one else is being challenged in either the Internal Economy Committee or the Rules Committee . 
i do not know of another senator who falls into the same category . 
the committee is merely requesting that Senator Thompson come and tell us why he has not appeared , why he will not listen to an order from the Senate , why he will not answer any mail that we have forwarded to him , even mail delivered by hand with a notary public ' s letter accompanying it . 
does that answer the questions ? 
senator Lawson : 
is the answer contained in the doctor ' s letter ? 
senator Maheu : 
we do not know . 
senator Lawson : 
the doctor says that he is not able nor well enough to be here for six months , effective November . 
senator Maheu : 
that has nothing to do with contempt . 
senator Lawson : 
what is the basis of the contempt ? 
senator Maheu : 
that is what we are considering . 
motion in Amendment 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
that the report be amended by deleting all of the words following the second paragraph and substituting thereof the following : 
that Senator Andrew Thompson be expelled from the Senate forthwith and that no further amounts be remitted to him for either his sessional indemnity or incidental expense allowance . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that will take care of it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Ghitter , seconded by the Honourable Senator Stratton : 
that the report of the Rules Committee be amended by deleting all but the preamble , and that the following be substituted therefor : 
that Senator Andrew Thompson be expelled from the Senate forthwith , and no further amounts be remitted to him for either his sessional indemnity or incidental expense allowance . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion in amendment ? 
senator Ghitter : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak to the amendment , if I may . 
i do not take what I am suggesting lightly or without due regard for the very serious nature of this motion . 
in fact , I know of no other such act that has ever been taken in this chamber . 
i have never met Senator Thompson , and those who know him have told me that he is a very pleasant and gracious individual . 
however , the point of the matter is that he has brought this institution into disrepute , he has ignored the order of the Senate , and he has outrageously abused the privileges of this place . 
let me first explain the legal basis upon which I regard this institution as having the authority to expel a member . 
section 18 of the Constitution Act , 1867 , reads as follows . 
the privileges , immunities , and powers to be held , enjoyed , and exercised by the Senate and by the House of Commons , and by the Members thereof respectively , shall be such as are from time to time defined by Act of the Parliament of Canada , but so that any Act of the Parliament of Canada defining such privileges , immunities , and powers shall not confer any privileges , immunities , or powers exceeding those at the passing of such Act held , enjoyed , and exercised by the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , and by the Members thereof . 
in dealing with the matter of expulsion , Beauchesne states as follows on page 16 of the 6 th edition , at paragraph 47 : 
that is , a member of the House of Commons . 
... to run again and be re - elected . 
then it carries on to speak of two occasions in the history of the House of Commons where there has been expulsion . 
most of us know of the situation of Louis Riel , and those who are familiar with Nova Scotia will know of the expulsion that took place in the legislature in Nova Scotia . 
there is no doubt in my mind that this chamber has the authority to expel a member . 
this is not a remedy to be used in a frivolous or a political manner . 
it is a remedy of last resort , in my opinion , and it is an action that should only be taken in the most grievous of circumstances . 
in my mind , and in my submission before you today , this is one of those situations . 
let me give you the reasons . 
i have before me the attendance record of the Honourable Andrew Thompson for the years 1980 to 1997 . 
until 1984 it seems his attendance was reasonable . 
i do not profess that everyone can be here all the time , nor should we be . 
it does not hurt to be in our communities . 
there is no perfect standard for attendance . 
it ridicules the Senate and is inappropriate , and a person in this situation should certainly resign . 
with regard to whether or not an individual should sit in the Senate , it is my submission today that Andrew Thompson ' s actions have brought the Senate into tremendous disrepute in the eyes of Canadians and have severely damaged the work and reputation of the Senate of Canada . 
all one needs do - and you have all read the editorials - is examine what people are saying about the Senate . 
that is not to say that before people were always saying favourable things about the Senate . 
that is not to say that this is a perfect institution with a perfect reputation . 
indeed , it is not . 
however , what Senator Thompson has done by his actions and by thumbing his nose at the Senate - and I will come to that in a moment - has become a lightning rod that has brought this institution and its work into great and tremendous disrepute . 
all of us in this chamber who believe in the Senate cannot and must not sit by and do nothing while this is occurring . 
let me read for the record some of the highlights of what is being said about the Senate as a result of the actions of Senator Thompson . 
early on , The Ottawa Citizen of October , 1997 , sported the headline : " Top Senate Truant Wants to Keep His Job . " 
next , in November of that same year , The Ottawa Citizen had the headline : " Searching for Mr. Thompson " : 
Mr. Thompson who was appointed to the Senate in 1967 , was booted out of the Liberal caucus Wednesday by Prime Minister Chr é tien ... 
good for Prime Minister Chr é tien ! 
between 1990 and this fall , he showed up a total of 12 times out of 459 sittings in the past two Parliaments - just enough times to collect his annual salary of $ 64,000 plus a $ 10,000 tax - free expense allowance . 
next , The Edmonton Journal in November : " Long Absences Bring Shame to the Senate . " 
this editorial states : 
being named to the Canadian Senate is a national honour . 
senators are given a guaranteed job till age 75 , with all the money and perks that national office bestows . 
in return , the Canadian people should at least be able to expect honourable behaviour from its senators . 
and later on it states : 
the great frustration with the Senate is the fact that real change - either an elected Senate or total abolition - is impossible because of our constitutional gridlock . 
we seem destined to be burdened with this embarrassing institution for years to come . 
that gridlock , however , is no excuse for the senators themselves not to tighten their rules . 
by setting higher standards , they could signal that the Senate is no longer a free ride . 
they might even convince Canadians the institution is worth preserving . 
yes , Sen . Thompson has become this year ' s poster boy for all that ' s said to be wrong with the chamber of sober second income . 
the Toronto Sun : " Adios , " it says : 
as for his service to Canadians , well , only a cynic would say that Thompson ' s career as no - show hasn ' t delivered . 
on the contrary , he may have succeeded where years of debate and endless rounds of constitutional talks have failed - that is , by convincing Canadians the Senate is a farce that must be overhauled or , better yet , abolished . 
the Ottawa Citizen : " At home with Senator Thompson , " is the heading , as it visits Mexico and describes the lifestyle . 
a lengthy article in The Globe and Mail , wherein Senator Thompson is saying , " I really do not care what they are saying about me . " 
he then speaks about the Senate , and he speaks of his disdain of the institution . 
that article states : 
he had few kind words about the Senate - 
" he " being Senator Thompson - 
- which he says is desperately in need of reform . 
" it could be so effective in helping people . 
it ' s like a morgue , " 
so says Senator Thompson . 
on and on it goes . 
honourable senators , I am sure , have all read it . 
i could go on all afternoon , reading what is being said about the Senate . 
however , honourable senators , it is not just what the media is saying about the Senate , not for one moment . 
it is what Main Street Canada is saying about the Senate . 
it is what we hear when we go home . 
it is the comments we receive from people , even our friends who jokingly say : " Why are you here ? 
why are you not in Mexico ? " 
we have all heard those comments , and we all know how demeaning this situation has become , from the point of view of this institution that we very much believe in and that we serve . 
what does Senator Thompson do ? 
when the Senate gives him that opportunity , and after a resolution that was passed in this chamber , he is then personally served with a document that says to him , " You shall appear by order of the Senate when it opens in February . " 
he is served with that document personally . 
honourable senators , have we heard from Senator Thompson ? 
did he come yesterday ? 
have we seen a lawyer , a doctor , a letter , or anything ? 
will he plead that he has not received the document when he was personally served with it ? 
will he say : " I did not know when the Senate would start . 
i had a document , but it did not say February 10 , so I do not know " ? 
is that credible ? 
of course it is not . 
what has our colleague Senator Thompson done to us ? 
i will not use the parlance of the street , but let us just say he thumbed his nose at us . 
he has thrown sand in our face , and he says that the Senate is a morgue for which he has no regard - not that he is here to help it any . 
he could not care less about this place . 
honourable senators , here we are today , talking in legal niceties about another order and serving him again . 
we say , " Let us be fair ; let us do all these things . " 
i say enough is enough . 
i say it is time that we showed some guts in this place . 
you are expelled . 
you will no longer abuse the privileges of this house and bring this house into disfavour . " 
some Hon Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I can permit any further debate , I must ask for some clarification from Honourable Senator Ghitter . 
if I understood him correctly , when he rose and gave the amendment he said " After the two first paragraphs ... " 
however , the motion that he sent me in writing says , " ... deleting all but the preamble . " 
i must have clarification as to which one is correct . 
senator Ghitter : 
confusion arose in that I did not see the material until it was just presented to me . 
the amendment relates to what was said by me , not what is in writing . 
after the first two paragraphs , everything should be deleted , and the amendment that I have described should be put in its place . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreed that we will change what I have read to what Senator Ghitter wants , as he describes it " after the first two paragraphs " ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
point of Order 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
the last four words in the suggested amendment by Senator Ghitter are obsolete , since the incidental expense allowance has already been cancelled . 
perhaps the Clerk could clarify that . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
are there any other comments on the point of order raised by Senator Maheu ? 
honourable senators , I believe that the Honourable Senator Maheu ' s point is valid . 
to simplify the situation , is it agreed that we delete " or incidental expense allowance " ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i think that Senator Ghitter wanted to include the tax - free monthly allowance that senators receive . 
i believe that is what he intended , not the general expenses for running the office . 
i think we would all agree that those last words be deleted and replaced with the words " special indemnity and tax - free allowance . " 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , rather than get into more points of order , can we have agreement to do that - delete " or incidental expense allowance " and replace it with the words " or tax - free allowance " ? 
is that agreeable ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am advised that the time allotted to the Honourable Senator Ghitter has expired . 
there can be no questions to him , except with leave of the Senate . 
is such leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Paul Lucier : 
honourable senators , far be it from me to stand here in this chamber and defend Senator Thompson or his behaviour . 
i believe that his behaviour has been to the discredit to all of us . 
i do not think it was necessary . 
the man lives in Toronto , and he could have found his way here at least a few times over the years . 
however , honourable senators , I have a problem with the way in which we are dealing with this issue . 
we keep referring to Senator Thompson ' s attendance . 
senator Thompson had legal , doctor ' s certificates , many of them , before the Clerk of the Senate covering his days of absence . 
last night our legal counsel , Mr. Audcent , made a very good presentation before the Rules Committee and pointed out very clearly that the Parliament of Canada Act , wherein is discussed Senate attendance , makes it very clear that when a senator has a doctor ' s certificate and is away for medical reasons , he is in attendance . 
he is not absent . 
for every day that Senator Thompson had a legal medical certificate before the Senate and the Clerk of the Senate stating that he was away because of illness , he was in attendance . 
honourable senators , I do not want to speak about the issue of contempt . 
i believe there may be a case for contempt . 
if you want to deal with Senator Thompson on the issue of contempt , do so . 
however , let us be governed by our own rules . 
let us follow the Parliament of Canada Act , which states very clearly that when a senator is absent - that is , he is not in the chamber or is not wherever someone might think he should be , as we think Senator Thompson should have been here yesterday - if he has a valid medical certificate , he is considered to be in attendance . 
that is the law . 
i am not making it up . 
it was pointed out to us last night by the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel , Mr. Mark Audcent . 
we should be very careful when issuing press releases and so on , and expelling Senator Thompson for something of which he is not guilty . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
your Honour , earlier , you said that Senator Ghitter had exhausted the time allotted for his speech on this debate , and you asked if there was consent for a question . 
there was then some side discussion . 
i only have one question for Senator Ghitter on his speech . 
i thought that we had consent from the Senate to do so . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I was under the impression that the Honourable Senator Lucier was rising to ask a question . 
it turned out that he wanted to make a speech , which would normally mean that further questions have been precluded . 
however , I admit that the Senate had agreed to questioning . 
if it is agreed , I will hear the question . 
is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , if I heard Senator Ghitter properly , he said that there are precedents in the House of Commons . 
could he kindly repeat that ? 
the only precedent that I hope would not be thrown into this debate is the manner in which the Louis Riel matter was handled and the reasons for that . 
could the honourable senator give me other examples so that I may reflect further on this point ? 
i do not want to start a debate on Louis Riel today . 
i am not in good shape to do that but I am more than ready to do so , should the occasion arise . 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
i am not equating Louis Riel with Senator Thompson or the facts . 
it is the legal precedent of the basis of the expulsion . 
there have been other cases . 
Beauchesne also quotes from the case of Fred Rose in 1946 . 
again , that one is somewhat different in fact . 
the House of Commons has the right to expel . 
Beauchesne ' s says , without a doubt , that the House has the right to expel a member for such reasons as it deems fit . 
Billy MacLean is another case , where the legislature in Nova Scotia expelled a member . 
clearly , it is the right of a legislative chamber to do so on grounds it deems fit . 
i am not comparing this situation to Louis Riel or to Fred Rose , but the right is there . 
i hope I have answered the question satisfactorily . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , this is an important question for all of us . 
therefore , we should deal with it in transparent fairness . 
the question that I have for the Honourable Senator Ghitter is this : 
Beauchesne ' s , Sixth Edition , page 17 , states : 
in any case where the propriety of a Member ' s action is brought into question , a specific charge must be made . 
the Speaker will not allow the Standing Committee on Elections , Privileges and Procedure to examine the actions and statements of a Member relating to the question to report generally on the matter . 
as a precondition , there must be process and a specific allegation . 
second - and I have not looked at this completely - the British North America Act , section 31 , states that the Place of a Senator shall become vacant for not appearing for two consecutive sessions , for aligning with a foreign power or for being adjudged bankrupt or insolvent . 
the pertinent one is found at paragraph ( 4 ) , which states : 
if he is attainted of Treason or convicted of Felony or of any infamous crime : 
i think we are caught here . 
i understand the feelings of all senators . 
we are caught between trying to do the appropriate thing and the right thing . 
that is my question . 
senator Ghitter : 
honourable senators , on the reference relative to the ways senators automatically lose their seats , section 31 states : 
the Place of a Senator shall become vacant in any of the following Cases : 
if any of those cases occur , the seat becomes vacant . 
i am told by counsel - and I discussed this section this morning - that there may be an argument to the effect that that section is exhaustive and there are no other grounds . 
however , the better opinion of that section relates to the section that I quoted , which deals in terms of the privileges , immunities and powers held and enjoyed by this chamber and the House of Commons as passed on from the British Parliament . 
we have all those powers . 
if Parliament wants the legislation to be more specific , " A senator ' s seat becomes vacant in the event of , " they have that power . 
however , our powers are broader than that . 
that is the argument . 
if I am wrong , then I invite Senator Thompson to deal with the matter through the courts . 
i cannot specifically say that I am right . 
i will only say that the better opinion that I have received is that we have the power . 
senator Grafstein : 
the honourable senator has answered the second part of my question , but the first part concerns the question of the specific charge . 
assuming that his conduct is egregious , there is still a question of due process and giving a senator an opportunity to respond to a specific charge . 
i do not want to prejudice my vote on this matter , but I do not think the world will come to an end if we give Senator Thompson a specific charge and a specific time to respond to that charge . 
i assume that the committee has done that . 
they have given him a short period of time to respond . 
having done that , as far as I am concerned , we have not done the right thing for the wrong reason . 
we want to do the right thing for the right reason . 
deal with the process question for me now . 
senator Ghitter : 
the process question can be established by this chamber in any manner it wishes . 
if this chamber determines that it wants to give notice and it wants to go through a process , then this chamber can do so . 
if Senator Grafstein wishes to be more gracious and sympathetic to this gentleman , he can say , " I want to give him notice again . " 
however , Senator Thompson has already thumbed his nose at us . 
he has already received the order of this place to appear . 
i was here yesterday . 
i do not know where his seat is , but he was not there . 
that is enough for me . 
others may have a different view , but the chamber can do as it wishes in that regard . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis : 
honourable senators , I notice in the honourable senator ' s amendment he suggests that Senator Thompson be expelled . 
what do you mean by " expelled " ? 
do you equate that with vacating his seat ? 
you may have answered that question a few minutes ago , but there may be quite a difference in the interpretation of that word . 
senator Ghitter : 
i use the term " expelled " based on what I have read of the authorities , limited as they are . 
it means that you are gone . 
you are out . 
that is fine . 
i think Mr. MacLean ran again in Nova Scotia . Nevertheless , in this place , " expelled " means that you are gone . 
the Prime Minister can reappoint him if he chooses to , but by that time he would be 75 . 
senator Lewis : 
what you are saying is that the seat be vacated ? 
senator Ghitter : 
Yes. 
senator Lewis : 
there might be some legal implications there . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , does that exhaust the questions ? 
are we ready to proceed with the debate ? 
senator Grafstein : 
i am sorry to belabour this point , but it is important . 
i cannot equate the power of this chamber to expel with the law of the Constitution which says " vacate . " 
there is no difference in my mind between " expulsion " and " vacation . " 
that appears to be the remedy that the honourable senator is suggesting for this chamber . 
essentially , he is saying that this chamber should decide what the definition of vacation is . 
i think there is an alternative that reaches the same result , but that is for another time and another place . 
i am not sure from reading this statute , namely the British North America Act , 1867 , whether we have the power to expel when the statute says that we can only vacate under certain preconditions . 
are we taking the Constitution into our hands ? 
i think the Constitution is above us . 
this chamber has to do its work under the Constitution . 
i am not here to defend Senator Thompson . 
he is an old friend of mine , but I am not here to defend his egregious conduct . 
in my heart and in my mind , I want us in this chamber to do , and to appear to do , the right thing . 
i am not sure that this is the right thing . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
is Senator Ghitter basing himself on that section of the state papers of 1867 which say that the rules of the House of Commons in Britain should apply to the Canadian House of Commons and the Canadian Senate ; and , further , on descriptions of those powers in Britain , which are also our powers , which say that we shall make our own rules on how to discipline people , and for what reasons ? 
senator Ghitter : 
Yes. 
i read section 18 of the act . 
that is what I understood it to say , and I have been advised that that is what it says . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not think that in this chamber there is a great deal of sympathy for , or empathy with , Andrew Thompson . 
i think Senator Thompson has , in many ways , reflected the things which Senator Ghitter has expressed so eloquently this afternoon . 
it did not give me any comfort when I read my morning paper to learn of interviews with Senator Thompson , or visits by reporters to Senator Thompson in La Paz , Mexico . 
there is no reason for any of us in this chamber to feel diminished . 
there is , however , a reason for us to feel diminished if we do not act with respect to our own rules . 
we passed an order in this chamber on December 16 . 
we informed Senator Thompson , by an order which was followed by a letter , that we wanted him to appear , and that if he did not appear the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders would deal with the issue of whether he should or should not be held in contempt of this chamber . 
the Rules Committee met last evening for a considerable length of time . 
i understand that 18 of our members attended that meeting . 
i also understand that they formulated a unanimous report . 
that unanimous report says that we want to ensure that due process is respected ; we want to order Senator Thompson to appear before us next Wednesdays evening ; we want to put to him questions on whether he should or should not be held in contempt . 
the committee , in its wisdom - or perhaps lack of wisdom - made a decision . 
i respect that decision . 
i was not present at that committee meeting . 
i did not participate in the debate . 
i therefore must conclude that they did the very best job that they could do in coming to the conclusion that they did . 
having come to that conclusion , they have asked this chamber to pass a resolution on an order , an order which I will support because of my respect for this chamber , and because it is not Andy Thompson who diminishes me ; it would be the work of the entire chamber and , as I respect the committee , I respect the chamber . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I am not a lawyer , and I do not pretend to be . 
i do not think that what we are debating here is unimportant . 
it is critically important . 
i appreciate the position that the committee took with regard to this issue . 
however , the fact is that the Canadian public is absolutely disgusted with how this man is treating the Canadian people , aside from his treatment of this place . 
he is thumbing his nose at them , in essence . 
he is saying , " You can ' t catch me . " 
Canadians are fed up to the eyeballs with this kind of behaviour . 
he demeans not only this place but Parliament as a whole , and the country as a whole . 
we all know that he has a medical certificate . 
get it done . 
let him come after us . 
let him sue and say that we do not have the right to do this . " 
that is what Canadians want , and that is what we should put on record . 
let him come to us . 
why should we be polite and go to him when he has treated this place , and this country , with utter and total contempt ? 
let us put the onus on him to come back to us and defend his position , that he deserves to get paid for being absent for this length of time . 
that is absolute and total nonsense , as you know . 
we have discussed the appropriate thing and the right thing . 
i believe that I have spelled out to you the right and appropriate thing to do today . 
if by next Wednesday he does not appear , what will you do then ? 
will we have another debate like this ? 
get it done now . 
senator Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I am terribly anxious to get Andy Thompson out of here . 
i feel the way you do . 
however , let us suppose that he turns up , or that he does not turn up , and we find out that he really is ill . 
is it not worth one more week to give him the chance to come and explain himself before us ? 
i would prefer to throw him out today . 
senator Stratton : 
you need only look down the way to Senator Gauthier . 
look at what he is going through in order to come here . 
senator Gigant è s : 
of course . 
jean - Robert Gauthier is an example to all of us . 
he is a particularly fine senator and he was a particularly fine MP and we are proud of him . 
not one of us in here is proud of Andy Thompson , but we are proud of the Senate . 
senator Carstairs was right - I must say that against all my gut instincts - when she said we must respect the procedures and rules of our institution . 
the rules of the British House of Commons say we can determine what to do with a member whom we want to discipline . 
we can determine his offence and what punishment we shall mete out for that offence ; that is clear . 
we cannot do that leaving some ambiguity . 
some members in the committee pointed out that we did not specify which day in February . 
i know it is splitting hairs , but those people who were splitting those hairs are good lawyers and they know what they are saying from the legal point of view . 
do we want to set a bad example regarding the respect for the other rules we have . 
there is a rule that says that if you declare you are sick you must produce a medical certificate . 
he has produced medical certificates from many doctors . 
i can fool any doctor and convince the doctor that I am suffering from everything if I so choose . 
i can walk in like a poor little old 75 - year - old senator , trembling a little on my feet , and say that I have back aches , which cannot be disputed . 
it is our rule that he must send medical certificates . 
he has sent them . 
we have some doubts and we say , come and explain yourself . 
we have said that once , but we said it without specifying a date . 
the lawyers on the committee , who are as anxious as the honourable senator to throw him out , said it was not a specific date . 
much as it hurts me , much as it twists my stomach and makes me want to vomit , I am afraid I will vote the way my deputy leader says I should . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
the senator raises an interesting point . 
we have , as now suggested , set a date certain that can be communicated to our colleague . 
what position is this chamber in should a lawyer or someone on his behalf produce a certificate saying he is not able to attend this chamber , nor his agents or his representatives , for a period of six months or two years ? 
what happens then ? 
senator Lewis : 
that will be for the Senate to decide . 
senator Gigant è s : 
what happens then ? 
what happens if we throw him out today and he comes tomorrow with that particular certificate ? 
whether today or a week from now , we must take that decision . 
if we take it in a week , after having given him notice to appear by a specific date and at a specific time , at least we will have set aside the possibility of being told we did not give him fair warning . 
that is all . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
i have a question for Senator Gigant è s . 
i am having the same problem of trying to come to the right conclusion here . 
you have pointed out the rights of Senator Thompson . 
you have said that we should do the right thing . 
perhaps the honourable senator should look at it as I am beginning to look at it , as Senator Thompson ' s responsibility . 
he has a responsibility to be here . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Andreychuk : 
he has a responsibility to know what is going on here . 
he has a responsibility to do his duties correctly . 
he got a notice . 
he had a responsibility to come here . 
we have a responsibility to the people of Canada . 
do I weigh Senator Thompson ' s rights as more important than bringing this house , the justice system and the whole parliamentary system into disrepute , because that is what I am doing if I bend to the rights of Senator Thompson ? 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Andreychuk and I are on the same side . 
you talk about not bringing the system under disrepute . 
that is what worries me ; this little lingering fear that if we do it today rather than a week from now , some lawyers may turn up and argue in law journals that we did not follow the procedure to the letter . 
it has no implications for me , I retire soon , but it is too serious a matter for us to disregard . 
senator Andreychuk : 
do you not agree that we should worry about the broad principles for which we are responsible . 
if we err , if we do anything wrong to Senator Thompson , he can come here and we can , as a body , take that into account and reverse ourselves . 
we have given the benefit of the doubt to Senator Thompson for too many years . 
perhaps we should give now some credence to the entire principles of this institution and to the whole concept of justice . 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Andreychuk , on the last point you raise , if we voted him out today for contempt , his seat would be vacant . 
he does not want him anywhere near . 
if the Prime Minister could send him to Antipodes he would do so , in a coffin . 
honourable senators , I was at the Rules Committee meeting last night . 
i must say that I opposed coming to the Senate today with the text of the letter that we are sending to Senator Thompson . 
i opposed it because of what I thought would happen , and it has happened . 
i have been spending some time explaining to some of my French - speaking colleagues the definition of a Mexican stand - off . 
i thought , first , that it was unnecessary , and second , that we would end up in a Mexican stand - off . 
i think most of us have the same goal , which is to deal with the problem of Senator Thompson . 
i do not think that at the meeting of the committee last night there was any disagreement that we should deal with the Thompson problem . 
that is not the issue . 
the issue is that he has not shown up for years , he has abused the system , and that situation must be dealt with . 
i understood that the motion that the Senate passed , to which he did not conform , put him in contempt . 
i am not a lawyer , but I have been in Parliament for 25 or 26 years , and I know that Parliament generally makes its own rules . 
we are a court . 
i understand that there is a difference , but I also understand the concept of natural justice . 
it seemed to me at the committee meeting last night that we were in the process of dealing with this issue in a fairly effective way , and I think most of us from both sides agreed . 
we did not have an argument . 
we would give Senator Thompson an opportunity to answer soon . 
we know that we are dealing with some place in Mexico . 
we could certainly send the notice to wherever his address is in Ontario ; we all understand that . 
however , in the spirit of natural justice , we decided that we would allow time enough for a message to be sent to him , requesting his presence at our committee to explain himself - I think we were intending to deal with this on Tuesday of next week , and it became Wednesday . 
this was done in the spirit of natural justice . 
i do not believe that anyone at the meeting last night had the idea that we would come in here today to this chamber and expel him . 
it is not a question of our being sued . 
we will not be sued . 
you cannot sue Parliament . 
what are you talking about ? 
the plain fact of the matter is that the man has certain rights . 
i believe it was generally understood by the committee last evening that those rights included having a message delivered from the committee , a request to appear before that committee . 
somehow - and certainly against my wishes - that turned into another appeal to the chamber as a whole to approve this letter . 
that has taken place , and I certainly would argue that we should approve the letter now that we have gone this far . 
if he does not obey that letter , I suppose that would be another contempt of the Senate . 
that has led into what I thought it would lead us into : a Mexican stand - off . 
some people here are friends of Senator Thompson , so naturally they might be defensive about this action . 
that is reasonable . 
that is natural . 
we must accept human nature . 
in any event , we brought the matter here , and time has gone by on something that , in my opinion , should not have been here in the first place , because we do not have to command him to come . 
we could have just requested him to come . 
on the excessively legalistic issue of what we do next , I know that he has not actually broken any rules . 
he has supplied a medical certificate . 
we have been into all of this background . 
there is a history to this situation . 
this is not something that has just arrived here today , or in the recent past . 
senator Thompson is entitled to a full pension . 
if he cannot attend , he should take his pension , in my opinion . 
i hope this letter goes out following this unnecessary procedure , which has led us into this debate that we did not need to have . 
we can send the letter . 
if he attends , that is another story , but if he does not attend , then I certainly would support the concept that , for this session , he does not get paid . 
i think that is reasonable . 
he can decide that he does not want to get paid for the next year or two - sessions now can last much longer than they used to - or he can take his pension . 
that seems to me to be a very reasonable resolution to the problem . 
in my opinion , we should not spend any more time here this afternoon firing away at each other , trying to be holier than holy , trying to make extra hay out of a very bad situation that we would all like to see cleared up because , of course , it reflects on us all . 
none of us like the situation . 
most of us are hard - working parliamentarians . 
we do not go in for this kind of thing . 
let us just get on with it , deal with it , get him to stay in Mexico with his pension , and end this problem . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , a number of distinctions need to be made to help clarify the debate . 
first , in December , when this house unanimously approved the order to show up at the next sitting of the Senate at the resumption of the session , there was no need to specify a date . 
i heard someone say a moment ago - I think it was Senator Gigant è s - that the date was uncertain . 
i am sorry but the date was certain . 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Nolin : 
it was a definite date : the day this House resumed sitting . 
that is not a valid argument . 
we do not give orders very often . 
very seldom in fact . 
he had every latitude to act after December 16 , the day this order was issued or , to be more precise , the day he was served with it . 
legalities aside , I am sure Senator Thompson reads Canadian newspapers every morning . 
by the morning of December 17 , he knew that he had been ordered to take his seat in this house when it reconvened . 
he chose to do none of this . 
last night , we found out he had contacted the Office of the Clerk to tell them he might be back in February . 
that ' s it ! 
he is therefore in contempt . 
nothing else matters . 
medical certificates no longer matter . 
all this stuff does not mean anything any more . 
yesterday , we heard the two experts who told us that he was in contempt . 
it is very simple . 
for example , when a court order is issued , if the person does not show up to testify , that person is automatically held in contempt . 
the judge then has the power to impose a penalty . 
today , we are dealing with a similar situation . 
we have various options , including a forced departure under section 18 . 
do not confuse it with other sections of the Constitution dealing with forced departures . 
i am referring to a section of the Constitution that gives us privileges which existed in the British House of Commons in 1867 . 
natural justice had until yesterday , at 2 p.m. , to prevail . 
senator Thompson did not show up , and he was fully aware of the circumstances . 
do not come and tell me that a senator who has been here for 31 years does not know when the Senate reconvenes , or how to find out the precise date when we resume sitting . 
he was instructed to be here at 2 p . m , yesterday . 
he did not come . 
he is in contempt of this institution . 
now , will we have the courage to go through with our decisions ? 
when we decided to issue an order to Senator Thompson , we knew that if he did not comply , we would have to find him guilty of contempt . 
it is up to us to do so , and we will do it today . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , again I find myself in the same difficult position as every senator does here . 
it is very difficult for any senator to defend Senator Thompson ' s conduct in the absence of a clear explanation . 
it is almost impossible to do so . 
if it were one session or two sessions , that might be understandable , but a lengthy , systemic absence is tantamount to abrogating his responsibilities . 
i think that was the point that the Honourable Senator Andreychuk was attempting to make . 
perhaps the Honourable Senator Ghitter was attempting to make the same point in his argument , although not in his conclusion , that systemically we have a failure to exercise responsibility . 
perhaps one session , two sessions or three sessions are all understandable because of illness , but if it goes on for a long period of time , where do we draw the line ? 
on the facts , the conclusion seems to be almost inexorable . 
i say " almost inexorable " because we have yet to hear from Senator Thompson . 
having said that , Senator Ghitter ' s proposition is very appealing . 
let ' s get it over ; let ' s get it done ; let ' s satisfy this outrage in the public and the outrage in the media . 
i would love to do that . 
why not ? 
then we can get on with our business ; we can clear our clogged veins . 
unfortunately , honourable senators , it is not as easy as that . 
what happens to Ontario ? 
do we have one seat less ? 
many people in the media , many people in the west , and many people outside of this chamber would love to see this chamber destroyed . 
they would love to pick away at it . 
i disagree with that , but I hear it . 
i have concluded that we cannot carry out this action unless we can conform with the British North America Act . 
the Prime Minister said the other day that he would like to kick Senator Thompson out , but cannot . 
he would like his colleagues on this side of the Senate to kick him out , but we do not believe we can do so without due process - and then there are questions . 
i say to Senator Beaudoin , a man whose entire life is built on the rule of law , and I say to Senator Jessiman , a great lawyer , and I say to senators on the other side who are respectable and honourable people as well as senators , let us think about this situation , not only to satisfy ourselves , not only to satisfy the public , but to satisfy the rule of law . 
i do not believe at this moment , unless I hear a compelling reason from the other side , that we can support this most appealing , most attractive and most spontaneous solution to the demands of our innermost conscience . 
my conscience says , yes , let us follow the committee ' s advice . 
senator Thompson should do the right and honourable thing by either appearing or offering an explanation . 
i think the onus to explain is upon him beyond a reasonable doubt . 
that should satisfy the conscience of the members of this chamber , and it should satisfy the Constitution . 
honourable senators , I believe in the Constitution , and I want to live under it . 
i do not want this chamber to be criticized for abusing the Constitution . 
i have argued and agreed with Senator Beaudoin , time and time again , that this Senate is responsible for upholding the Constitution . 
having said that , how can we fly in the face of it and then impose a standard on others outside of this chamber ? 
senator Nolin : 
perhaps the Honourable Senator Grafstein could tell me which section of the Constitution we are breaching ? 
which one ? 
senator Grafstein : 
i refer Senator Nolin to section 31 of the British North America Act , 1867 , which , as amended , is really the Constitution Act of 1982 . 
we are clear on that now ? 
senator Nolin : 
would the honourable senator explain it to us ? 
senator Grafstein : 
section 31 reads as follows : 
( 1 ) If for Two consecutive Sessions of Parliament he fails to give his Attendance to the Senate : 
that is the factual question yet to be determined by the committee . 
on the face of it , prima facie , he has not attended , but there is conflicting evidence about that . 
we have heard that from other senators . 
that is proposition number 1 . 
( 2 ) If he takes an Oath ... to a Foreign Power ... 
that is not the case . 
( 3 ) If he is adjudged Bankrupt or Insolvent ... 
that is not the case . 
( 4 ) If he is attained of Treason or convicted of Felony or of any infamous Crime : 
( 5 ) If he ceases to be qualified in respect of Property or of Residence ... 
those appear to be the provisions under the act . 
as I say , I would like to follow this act . 
senator Nolin : 
what if I told you to read section 18 of the same Constitution ? 
under that specific section , we have been told that the doctrine is very clear . 
as a chamber , we have the power to expel someone . 
that power was there in the U . K . in 1867 , and we have had that power since . 
that is what we were told last night , namely , we have the power to expel . 
forget section 31 . 
it is not in question here . 
section 18 is the basis of our right today . 
senator Grafstein : 
this is an important question . 
i have not had the opportunity of counsel and I have not read the opinions that were available to the committee . 
having said that , when I read section 18 about the privilege and immunities and powers held and enjoyed by the Senate , I thought that the process that we had undertaken here , collectively , was to move towards a remedy that would be consistent with the Charter and our powers . 
the remedy that I thought we were moving towards was the suspension of the senators rights and privileges because he has been held in contempt . 
first , we must make a finding of contempt . 
we then suspend his rights and privileges and then let him decide how he wants to get himself back in good standing or do whatever else he chooses . 
i thought that was the course that the committee was moving towards . 
i am not comfortable with moving to section 31 to vacate or expel , which is tantamount to vacating the seat . 
i think that is a material distinction . 
senator Nolin : 
the honourable senator is a lawyer , and he knows the difference . 
the result is the same ; the process is not . 
you have to agree on that . 
senator Ghitter : 
honourable senators , Senator Grafstein has appropriately pointed to Senator Beaudoin as the guru in this chamber relative to our powers . 
i should like Senator Beaudoin to give us his opinion . 
that is the question . 
motion in Subamendment 
hon. Edward M. Lawson : 
honourable senators , notwithstanding the point that Senator Ghitter has made , sufficient doubt has been raised by the presentation given by Senator Grafstein as it applies to the British North America Act ; and by Senator Lucier , so that no layman or non - lawyer such as myself is prepared to make a decision without His Honour making a ruling on proper legal advice from the Senate lawyers . 
i do not mean legal advice from Senator Beaudoin or others , but from legal counsel for the Senate . 
they should make a decision and report to us about whether or not we have the legal right to proceed to expel , or to cause the seat to be vacated . 
i am asking for that advice now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Speaker cannot become involved in legal decisions . 
i cannot get involved in that matter . 
however , if it is the wish of the Senate , someone can put forward an amendment that we hear from counsel . 
that is for the Senate to decide , not the Speaker . 
senator Lawson : 
therefore , I move : 
that we seek the Senate legal counsel to advise us whether we have the legal right to proceed in the manner being proposed . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is exactly what the committee was doing . 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Senator Ghitter . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is there a seconder ? 
this is a subamendment . 
we already have a motion in amendment but there is still the possibility of a subamendment , which would be the last . 
please give me the motion in writing . 
we must be very precise . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
your Honour , I have a point of order . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i can hear a point of order on the subamendment , although it is not before us at the moment . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , what I have read for 35 years about the Senate chamber is that order excludes haste and precipitation . 
today , we are faced with a resolution with amendments and subamendments . 
we are even challenging each other , in a very unfair way , to put Senator Beaudoin on the spot by saying , " Here is our guru . 
why do you not get up and tell us what you think . " 
the matter demands reflection . 
i suggest to the Senate that we take 24 hours to reflect and make a decision on the entire matter tomorrow . 
that would be more appropriate for senators . 
i am impressed with what Senator Grafstein and Senator Lewis have said . 
if you have read Mr. Crosbie ' s memories , you will know that he referred to Senator Lewis as a quiet but great legal mind . 
all of that put together makes me believe that 24 hours will not harm anyone . 
i understand the press . 
there is a major preoccupation with this issue , but we must deal with it . 
i wish to take my responsibility now - although it may be unpopular with the press and with public opinion - and move the adjournment of the debate . 
if I am not here tomorrow - that is , if I am not healthy - you may proceed without me . 
i am sure that all senators would like to reflect on this serious matter . 
that is what the Senate is all about . 
i am sure that all Canadians will understand that 24 hours , in an orderly debate , would not be unreasonable to deal with this matter , namely , the absence of Senator Thompson . 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
point of order ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
a point of order was already raised by the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme . 
however , he has made a suggestion . 
if honourable senators wish to follow that suggestion , the Senate is free to do so . 
senator Stollery : 
i do not quite understand what has happened . 
has the other side withdrawn the unanimous support that it gave last night ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I do not see a valid point of order in the comments of Senator Stollery . 
they may be valid comments in the debate but they are not a point of order insofar as a challenge of the rules . 
the Honourable Senator Lawson has his subamendment ready now . 
we will hear that first . 
senator Lawson : 
honourable senators , I move , seconded by Senator Lucier : 
that the Senate obtain from legal counsel available to the Senate whether the Senate has the legal right to deal with the motion before us to expel Senator Thompson from the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
that is not a valid subamendment in its present form . 
senator Lawson : 
we will change the form , then ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
we would have to amend the amendment by adding " thereto " and then see if it fits . 
senator Lawson : 
with the same seconder , then , I move : 
that the debate on the motion in amendment be adjourned until the Senate Law Clerk has rendered an opinion on its legality ; and 
that the Law Clerk report his opinion to the Senate by tomorrow . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Lawson , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier : 
that the motion in amendment be amended by adding thereto : 
that the debate on the motion in amendment be adjourned until the Senate Law Clerk has rendered an opinion on its legality ; and 
that the Law Clerk report his opinion to the Senate by tomorrow . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I have no objection to waiting for twenty - four hours . 
we are dealing here with a fundamental legal problem . 
i have no doubt that a legislative assembly may expel a member . 
this is what we call , in constitutional law , an inherent right . 
however , the jurisprudence is only about the House of Commons in London and the House of Commons in Canada , and some historical cases such as that of Louis Riel . 
to my knowledge , this is the first time that the Senate has had a debate such as this . 
in the British North America Act , there are sections dealing with the vacation of a seat . 
the idea of having an expression of opinion in 24 hours from someone not of this house would be quite acceptable to me , although I think that if we look clearly at the facts of the case before this chamber , we are probably waiting for nothing at all . 
the situation has remained the same for many years . 
if a person is prepared to go to Mexico , why not to Ottawa ? 
in that sense , perhaps we are discussing this matter for nothing . 
however , as a jurist , I would like to have an independent opinion . 
nevertheless , I still think that , in extraordinary cases - and I believe that everyone in Canada agrees that is the case here - a legislative house , within its sphere , has the inherent right to expel a member . 
that is my conclusion . 
i may be wrong , but I am inclined to think that way . 
i should like to look at some precedents in the House of Lords , or some other second chambers in the world . 
in that sense , it might be good to have 24 hours in which to think more about the matter . 
however , for the moment , that is my opinion . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I sat in the House of Commons for 30 years . 
we have expelled members from the House of Commons , but we have not vacated their seats . 
we must be very precise . 
senator Lewis , strongly supported by the Honourable Senator Grafstein , drew our attention to the fact that " expel " and " vacate " may mean different things . 
before we vote , we will need to read the motion very carefully . 
" expel " could mean " expelling " or it could mean " no pay , " which may be a good proposal . 
senator Thompson could not receive his pension because he has not resigned , but also he could not be paid because he does not show up . 
that is a decision which has previously been made for staff . 
we would be punishing him by saying that he is a nobody . 
if he wants to receive money , he will need to resign and then he will get his pension . 
i have a question for Senator Beaudoin . 
honourable senators , there is not a lot of difference between " expel " and the term used by Senator Lewis , with his very precise legal mind , " vacate . " 
haste and precipitancy may be useful for public opinion , but we are supposed to be very serious people , and I think we are . 
the action that we take should be that upon which we all agree . 
there are many other alternatives . 
the press has reason to say that the man never shows up and therefore does not deserve to be paid . 
we started to punish him . 
perhaps we did not punish him well enough , and should go all the way . 
perhaps we should say that if he does not show up there will be no pay , for the indicated reasons . 
or we could say that if wants to receive money , he need only resign in order to receive his pension . 
i believe that this debate needs to be conducted in an orderly manner . 
haste , in this case , is not leading to good order . 
we are not answering to the mob . 
we want to do what is best in the interests of Canada , and surely 24 hours of reflection will hurt no one . 
we may come up with a clearer solution . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if the subamendment were to be adopted , I would hope that senators would agree that we resolve ourselves into a Committee of the Whole and have the Law Clerk appear before us in order that we might have an opportunity for exchange with legal counsel . 
as they say in the House of Lords , if there is content for the subamendment , I would ask my colleague opposite whether she would agree that we would receive that opinion in Committee of the Whole . 
if we cannot have agreement and a motion is necessary , I would seek the opportunity to move such a motion . 
senator Lawson : 
the 24 hours is not cast in stone . 
i have no problem with changing that aspect . 
hon. Michel Cogger : 
senator Beaudoin , I have listened to your speech and I have more questions . 
lacking a clear distinction between the power to expel and to declare vacant , do we not run the risk of ending up in a situation where the power of the Prime Minister to be the only one to select and appoint senators would be frustrated ? 
what would there be to prevent such a thing ? 
is there not an inherent contradiction in this motion , which would , when it came down to it , mean that we would have the right , by majority vote , to declare a vacancy ? 
i am no longer referring to expulsion for various lengths of time . 
senator Beaudoin : 
obviously , if there is a by - election - I think this was what happened in Nova Scotia - the individual who was expelled ran again . 
if memory serves , he was re - elected . 
so that sorted out the problem . 
senators are not elected , and appointments are made by the Governor General on the advice of the Prime Minister . 
once a senator is expelled , does the seat necessarily become vacant ? 
i would like to hear an opinion on this as well . 
but if it is not challenged , and the Prime Minister appoints a replacement , that solves the problem . 
but obviously it can be challenged later . 
i will not take this any further . 
obviously , this will set a precedent and cause an uproar . 
if I were asked if a legislative chamber may take this action , I am inclined to think it has the inherent right to do so . 
however , the opposite argument is that the Constitution already has sections 18 and 31 , which set out the privileges enjoyed by the Senate and contain provisions regarding Senate vacancies . 
is this exhaustive ? 
does this prevent the exercise of an inherent right ? 
i will not take it further for now . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
if there is no appeal , the Prime Minister could appoint someone else . 
appeal where ? 
before what court ? 
that is the first question . 
the courts traditionally do not meddle in the internal affairs of Parliament . 
second , is Senator Beaudouin aware of the fact that we had two legal opinions yesterday at the meeting of the Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders to the effect that we can expel a senator . 
the Senate ' s legal advisor said that historical documents from 1867 indicate the rules of the British House of Commons apply to the Canadian House of Commons and Senate . 
senator Beaudoin : 
on the first point , it is true that the courts do not meddle in the legislative process . 
however , the courts have the right to give an opinion on the application of the Constitution . 
in this regard , if Senator Thompson says no , the Senate ' s action is ultra vires , he can of course appeal to the courts . 
the court would decide . 
if he does not , and the seat is filled , the matter is resolved . 
that is all I am saying . 
senator Gigant è s : 
whether we decide today or next week , what we are saying at the moment is relevant , and I hope that we will not have to debate it again next week . 
if the senator appeals our decision , the court will be obliged to find that the action taken by this chamber to discipline one of its members was not correct . 
British law that applies to the British House of Commons and to the Canadian House of Commons and Senate makes no provision for intervention by the courts with respect to a legislative chamber that says : " You have not done your job well . " 
i am not talking about the interpretation of a section of the Constitution on the reasons for expelling a senator . 
i am speaking of the inherent right you refer to . 
and with this inherent right , would the courts dare intervene ? 
senator Beaudoin : 
according to Canada ' s Constitution , a Canadian court has the right to decide whether a legislative assembly has the inherent right to expel a member . 
it will not express an opinion in a specific instance , but it will on the right of the legislative chamber to expel a member . 
the Fathers of Confederation provided a special system for the Senate that differs from that of the House of Commons . 
house of Commons precedents may apply here but only so long as they are consistent with the Constitution of the Senate . 
i think that , in a truly extraordinary case , the right to expel is inherent . 
now , should we exercise that right ? 
that is another matter . 
do the lawyers agree that the right is inherent ? 
if they said so yesterday , that confirms what I am saying today . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
i have a question for Senator Beaudoin . 
as always , he makes a compelling analysis of a situation which forces us to again think through our original proposition . 
i have looked briefly at an opinion which was available to the committee last night . 
i was not at the committee , but one of my colleagues gave me an opportunity to look at Dawson ' s view on this . 
i hope I am not taking his view out of context , but Dawson essentially says that we are pretty well stuck to section 31 . 
there are many things we can do , but we do not have the same powers as the other place , for good and appropriate constitutional reasons . 
while we can compare ourselves to the House of Lords in England , I think it is more appropriate to compare ourselves to the situation here in Canada . 
i do not think we have the same inherent powers or remedies . 
i am intrigued by Senator Beaudoin ' s inherent rights notion , but Dawson , who is a compelling authority , as far as I am concerned , makes no reference to this . 
he wrestles with this problem , as other senators at other times have wrestled with this issue , and all have come to the conclusion that they were caught by the Constitution and those provisions . 
the nice question that arose from that discussion dealt with the definition of infamous crime . 
is it systematic abrogation of responsibilities for a senator to not attend ? 
it is a nice question . 
i leave it for other finer minds to chew over in the foreseeable future . 
for me , the course of conduct made available to us by the committee , which , I am delighted to say , was unanimous , is a safe course of conduct for all of us . 
senator Beaudoin : 
i am impressed by the opposite argument that there is no such thing as an inherent right . 
however , the fact remains that the Constitution refers to many rights which the Senate has . 
we have the same rights as the House of Commons except the vote of non - confidence , money bills , and the Constitutional amendment , on which we have only a six - month veto . 
otherwise , we have the same powers . 
we are a legislative house , as is the House of Commons . 
history shows that the House of Commons has expelled people . 
i am inclined to think that we also have such a right . 
i respect an opinion to the contrary , of course , because it is a difficult point . 
it is interesting , mind you , but it is difficult . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I wish to address the subamendment proposed by Senator Lawson and seconded by Senator Lucier . 
this subamendment presupposes to some degree the work that the committee was going to do . 
it is my understanding that the report presented by the Rules Committee today demands the appearance of Senator Thompson . 
they wanted an order of this house to have him appear . 
if he chose to appear , he would give reasons why he should not be held in contempt . 
if they decided , with or without his appearance , he was in contempt , they would then debate the particular penalties that would apply ; whether it would be expulsion or whether it would be suspension for the remainder of the session of this Parliament , which would more or less coincide with his retirement because he will have reached the age of 75 , thereby giving him the option to retire early if he chose to do so . 
the committee heard last night from the clerk . 
they also heard from other constitutional opinions . 
it was on that basis they prepared the report for today . 
they want to deal further with constitutional opinion on penalties . 
therefore , it would appear to me that the most appropriate thing for us today would be to not support this amendment , as much as we may wish at some time in the future to sit in Committee of the Whole and hear the Law Clerk , after the committee has made a recommendation on penalty . 
now is not the appropriate time to do it . 
we should send the order today to demand that Senator Thompson appear , allow the committee to sit , allow them to deliberate on penalty , and allow them to bring those deliberations to the chamber . 
then we can have a debate in this chamber as to the appropriate votes we should be taking , including deliberations in Committee of the Whole , if that is the will of this chamber at that point in time . 
some Hon. Senators : 
question ! 
hon. P . Michael Pitfield : 
honourable senators , I wish I could speak with the natural dignity and the eloquence of so many of our colleagues . 
let me simply put a few thoughts . 
one of the main purposes of this house is to do justice , to protect against tyranny ; the tyranny , amongst other things , of the majority . 
this is a chamber of sober , second thought . 
we are concerned with protecting the citizen as an individual , and we also are very concerned to protect the individual senator , to protect one another , so that we can be sure that each is bringing his or her best judgment to the questions before us . 
i wish to speak for a moment simply of the procedure that we are following . 
i make no remarks with regard to the particular case . 
it seems to me that we are engaged in a rush to judgment . 
i get nervous when I hear some of our colleagues saying , " We have the power . " 
there is no doubt that we have the power , but we must use it very responsibly , all the more so . 
i have heard , " We must do it now . " 
there have been some very serious doubts raised in this matter . 
we have heard doubts of facts that have been raised by Senator Lawson . 
we have heard doubts of equity that have been raised by Senator Grafstein . 
we have heard doubts about the conflict of the supreme constitutional law with the parliamentary practices of the house . 
honourable senators , I suspect that we are acting as the sharpest and strongest amongst our critics would wish us to act . 
we are giving and we are asking for off - the - cuff legal opinions . 
i urge that we proceed calmly , deliberately , fairly . 
i assure you that if we do not , this matter will be in the courts for years . 
there is the substance here for problems and questions that will keep lawyers writing articles for time immemorial . 
let us not fulfill the worries of Senator Stollery about a Mexican stand - off ; dragging this thing out , spreading the uncertainty , making ourselves a laughing - stock of the country , Canada ' s response to President Clinton . 
we wish to deal with this matter . 
we must deal with this matter , but let us do it in a manner that stands as an example of how legislators should proceed , not as a standard to be referred to in the future of how things should not have been done . 
it is coming to the close of a long afternoon . 
i wonder - it may not be possible - if sometime during the evening , our leaders could have a word with one another to consider how this house , with its manifold and sensible concerns , can draw together and deal with this question in the deliberate manner in the morrow . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak ? 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I presume nobody will take up the suggestion that Senator Pitfield has just made and try to move the adjournment of the debate ? 
i see no takers . 
then , honourable senators , if this is going to come to a vote , I think I had better explain myself , not least to my friends and colleagues on this side of the house . 
before I do that , I note that it is 3:40 and we are still at Presentation of Reports from Standing or Special Committees , and that we may be heading for a recorded vote . 
that being the case , in my capacity as chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , I want to advise colleagues that I am taking it upon myself to postpone until next week the meeting scheduled for this afternoon . 
i apologize in particular to Senator Haidasz whose Bill S - 8 would have been considered this afternoon with him as principal witness . 
i trust that colleagues and staff within the sound of my voice will take note that I am taking it upon myself to postpone that committee meeting until next week . 
honourable senators , what we have before us is a report from a standing committee , a report which we are led to believe was passed unanimously by that committee last night . 
when the report was brought in this afternoon by the chairman , she sought leave to debate the report at once . 
i pause for a moment to say that our first mistake today was in granting leave . 
what has transpired since we granted leave only goes to prove the wisdom of the rule that it is a good idea to leave committee reports on the table for 24 hours before attempting to deal with them . 
perhaps we will know better next time . 
however , leave was granted , whereupon our friend Senator Ghitter proposed a motion in amendment - but to do what ? 
to do something that the Senate , in its 130 - year history , has never done , to do something for which our authority is not clear . 
i might , at some point , be willing - quite willing - to vote in favour of the expulsion of Senator Thompson , but , not having heard any of the legal or constitutional opinions adduced to the committee last night , and being , as I am , quite unclear as to our authority in this matter , I would certainly not vote in favour of such a motion this afternoon . 
with regard to part of our friend Senator Lawson ' s amendment , I do not know that I would be ready to vote for it in 24 hours ' time . 
this is an unprecedented step we are taking , and if it is to be taken , then I think we should , as Senator Pitfield has said , proceed deliberately and cautiously . 
we should know fully what it is we are doing and with what authority we are doing it . 
there is potentially another problem here . 
i put this to our friend Senator Ghitter . 
if we are satisfied with the authorities , and satisfied that it is the right thing to do , I am not sure , and if his amendment comes to a vote and is defeated today , we could return in due course and take that step , which is a step we might want to take . 
for all those reasons , and for the reasons of process and constitutionality that have been invoked by other honourable senators in the debate , I could not vote for those amendments to this report . 
i simply say that by way of explanation . 
if the matter is forced to a vote now , I will have to vote against it . 
i think a more desirable course for all of us is the one suggested by Senator Pitfield , that there be an opportunity for some discussion among the leaders to agree , if not on what action we should take ultimately , then at least on what the process is that we should follow , because it is fairly clear to me that there was an agreement at the committee meeting last night as to the process that was to be followed , and the various amendments that have been presented today rather derail the process that was contemplated . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a few brief remarks . 
as Senator Murray says , the Senate has not been faced with such an issue in 130 years , so we are navigating uncharted waters , to use a well - worn clich é . 
all of us feel uncomfortable with the situation before us , although I think we are unanimous in the intent that is expressed in Senator Ghitter ' s amendment . 
it is a question not only of how we get there but of how we get there properly and expeditiously . 
we have had the situation with us now for many years . 
all of us have been conscious of the fact that Senator Thompson has not been with us , except on those occasions when the law required . 
when asked , we were told that there was a medical certificate . 
never would I challenge a medical certificate of one of our colleagues . 
however , when a colleague cannot present himself for a decade , we have a right to ask what contribution he is making to this place . 
again , I think we all want to see Senator Thompson leave this chamber , unless he can come to us suddenly and say , " Now I am able to work and finish my two years that are left , actively , as I should . " 
that , however , seems to be highly unlikely . 
as I say , we must do this properly and as legally as the experts can tell us we should do it , although , as far as I know , there are no precedents to this situation . 
i am in agreement with Senator Lawson ' s suggestion that we ask our legal counsel for advice . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
if we were to expel Senator Thompson from this chamber today , what would be the effect of the expulsion ? 
does he continue to be a senator ? 
we are not clear on that . 
i am not here to defend the rights of one particular senator ; I am here to defend the rights of all senators , each and every one of us . 
last December we set in motion what is commonly called " due process " in respect to the case of Senator Thompson . 
we had the motion of Senator Kenny . 
we had hoped Senator Thompson would show up yesterday . 
that committee met last night and brought in a unanimous report , which was presented today . 
leave was given to consider the report today . 
the report proposed a process . 
if we are not satisfied with the opinions given by legal counsel last night , we can explore the legal issues further in that process . 
what concerns me more than anything is the kind of precedent that we may be setting or that we could be setting here today . 
if we vote to expel Senator Thompson in a day , who would be next and why ? 
i am conscious of the honest concern of every member in the chamber , that we , individually and collectively , want to do the right thing . 
however , we want to make sure that when we proceed we are absolutely right and that we are being fair , not only to Senator Thompson , but to one another . 
senator Stratton : 
what about the Canadian public ? 
senator Graham : 
i heard Senator Nolin ask if we have the courage . 
well , I am wondering if we could better serve the institution and the Canadian public by asking if we have the guts and the courage today to follow due process and wait until next Wednesday , as recommended by the committee . 
the process has been set in motion . 
that is why we have committees . 
the final judgment , however , is made in this place , where it should be made . 
honourable senators , I am quite conscious of the remarks made by Senator Pitfield about fairness . 
people have used the words " diminished " and " demeaned " , and we hear the question " What about the public ? " 
i think that as representatives of the public , we have a responsibility to ensure that this institution , a vital and essential part of Parliament under our present Constitution , takes action , but not simply on a whim or because of what the press is saying as it influences public opinion . 
rather , in our hearts , our minds and our souls , we should use common sense , reason , good judgment and fairness in reaching our conclusions . 
hon. C . William Doody : 
honourable senators , I have two questions of clarification . 
i do not know if I am more scared about the road we are heading down without thinking it through properly , or if I am more disgusted with Senator Thompson ' s conduct . 
it has been a very troubling afternoon . 
i am more inclined , personally , to think favourably of Senator Pitfield ' s recommendation . 
that may not be possible . 
however , I am faced with the 24 - hour subamendment that has been offered to us and one which has been recommend by my leader . 
do we start the Committee of the Whole tomorrow at 4:30 p.m. or 4:25 p.m. , or are we talking in terms of the next sitting of the Senate ? 
it would seem pointless to come in here , go through the process of sitting around until 4:30 , and then start a Committee of the Whole . 
if this must be done , let it be done when we sit . 
second , will we be forced to vote on Senator Ghitter ' s amendment tomorrow when this thing is finished without having heard , perhaps to the satisfaction of everyone , all of the testimony we would like to have heard ? 
i am a little uncomfortable with the idea of a Committee of the Whole . 
we have already referred this matter to a committee of the Senate . 
the committee has reported and given us a unanimous recommendation . 
having gone that far , the recommendation I have received from our leadership is that we go along with Senator Lawson ' s recommendation of a 24 - hour response . 
can we tidy that up as to whether it is really a 24 - hour period or is it the next sitting ? 
how will we proceed tomorrow ? 
will we be required to vote on Senator Ghitter ' s motion tomorrow , even if we are satisfied that we have heard the testimony and before we have had a chance to read the committee report ? 
could someone help me with some of these problems ? 
senator Graham : 
perhaps I can make a point by asking Senator Doody a question . 
would he not agree that according to the house order that was passed - Senator Kenny ' s motion in December - we still have two weeks in which to act on the particular motion and matter before us today ? 
senator Stollery : 
honourable senators , the committee was very conscious last night of the fact that we have to comply with the order of December within 14 days . 
that includes the problem of making sure that Senator Thompson receives the communication and that it is done in a reasonable manner . 
i would caution our colleagues against letting too much time go by because it would infringe on the concern addressed by the committee , that there are only 14 days in which to complete this process . 
it is very important to remember that . 
some senators could have said that we should have done this on Friday and that Senator Thompson be asked to appear on Friday . 
the consensus was that it should be Wednesday because of the possible difficulties of Senator Thompson receiving the communication . 
i repeat that all of these things were done unanimously . 
senator Doody : 
honourable senators , I am obviously completely adrift . 
i asked two questions of the leadership relative to the procedure in dealing with this thing . 
he , in turn , asked me a question concerning what I thought about Senator Kenny ' s motion , which is not in my area of interest at this particular time . 
i am interested in whether 24 hours means 4:30 tomorrow afternoon , and whether we will be required to vote on the subamendment and perhaps on the motion tomorrow . 
we may or may not have enough information tomorrow to satisfy us to follow that course . 
maybe I am remiss . 
maybe the report from the committee was delivered to me earlier today . 
i have not seen it . 
i certainly have not had a chance to read it , nor have I had time to look at what they have decided . 
with these uncertainties in mind , I am asking for guidance from the leadership . 
if , somewhere down the road , they want an opinion on what I think of Senator Kenny ' s motion , perhaps I might be prepared to give it then . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I will do my best , although I may do it with the clarity of mud . 
what we have before us now is the subamendment of Senator Lawson . 
i have indicated that I cannot support that proposal , because I think this debate should take place in committee before it takes place on the floor of the chamber . 
if , however , Senator Lawson ' s subamendment passes in the chamber , we would then make a decision to hear from legal counsel . 
we would then have to make a decision as to when we would have the Committee of the Whole hear that presentation . 
however , it is essential for us to take the vote on the motion first , and then to set in place the procedure concerning when , exactly , the Committee of the Whole would convene . 
it would be tomorrow afternoon if the matter goes before Committee of the Whole , or we could ask legal counsel by some other means , although I do not know what other means we would use except Committee of the Whole . 
however , we would have to have the approval of Senator Lawson ' s subamendment first . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , what we want to know are two things that were raised by - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton has already spoken on this issue . 
is leave granted for the honourable senator to speak again ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
as I understand Senator Lawson ' s motion , it is 24 hours , which means " the next sitting . " 
it should be amended to reflect that . 
senator Ghitter ' s amendment to the report has brought up two crucial facts which we must face if we are serious about seeing that Senator Thompson is recognized de facto as no longer a member of this chamber . 
first , what authority does this chamber have to expel him , suspend him , displace him or refuse him entry ? 
that is what we want to know . 
that is what Senator Ghitter ' s intention was , namely , to force the issue here where this final decision will have to be taken . 
if we cannot expel him , can we suspend him ? 
if we cannot suspend him , can we refuse him entry as we refused him his office and the benefits attached to his office ? 
second , can the Senate refuse his salary and his monthly tax - free allowance ? 
that is what we want to know . 
that is what we all hope for - that is , that for non - performance there be non - payment . 
the point is that if we are to take this action - and I agree with all the discussion that has taken place - we should do it the right way . 
the value of Senator Ghitter ' s amendment was to bring the decision to a head in this chamber because a decision must be taken here . 
that is why it is essential that the legal counsel should advise us on those two points . 
hopefully , we can have that legal opinion before us tomorrow and debate it , if need be . 
we did not resume sitting today , we resumed yesterday . 
therefore , he did not honour the order of the Senate . 
why do we want to give him another week ? 
it is important that Senator Ghitter ' s amendment be put under the scrutiny of our expert legal counsel and that , if at all possible , he report to us tomorrow so that we can come to a decision , which I feel is long overdue . 
hon. Richard J . Stanbury : 
honourable senators , I am amazed at what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting . 
we have a process in the Senate which has been honoured for many , many years , namely , that we refer matters to a committee and the committee is given an opportunity to deal with the matter . 
the committee then reports to the Senate and the Senate deals with that report . 
first , I wish to take issue with the Leader of the Opposition about the order that was made on December 16 . 
the order said , " You are to appear on the resumption of the Senate , " which was yesterday , " and if you do not , the matter will be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . " 
that is what happened . 
last night , the committee took note that the senator had not turned up and considered what its process should be from there on , so that it could report to the Senate within the two weeks that the Senate had given it to report . 
the purpose of the interim report today is simply to obtain the authority of the Senate to order the appearance to continue to develop this process . 
the committee could have invited him to attend , as Senator Stollery wanted to do last night . 
members - and some of them were Conservative - said , " We do not have authority to invite him . 
we should get the order from the Senate . 
that would give us authority . " 
the whole purpose of the order of the Senate is to begin the process - that is , to give Senator Thompson another opportunity to come here and then to begin the committee discussions , which have to be done quickly because we only have two weeks . 
the committee discussions would involve receiving whatever legal advice we need to be able to come back to the Senate within two weeks and report . 
i perfectly understand Senator Ghitter ' s motion . 
we are all frustrated and want to get it over with . 
however , if we were to pass his amendment , we would simply cut off the opportunity for the committee to do its work , the work which this chamber gave to the committee to do . 
we gave them two weeks in which to do it . 
they are only here this afternoon to ask for authority to get on with the process . 
for goodness sake , let us not mess this thing up any more . 
let us pass the committee report . 
that means an order will go out immediately to Senator Thompson . 
it will be done properly and served properly . 
if he does show up , then we have another situation to deal with but if he does not show up , then the committee must consider what it will report to the Senate . 
within two weeks - which is what the Senate asked for - the Senate will have the opportunity , on the basis of good , solid , evidence and opinion , to make a decision . 
i ask honourable senators to give the committee that opportunity and let us get out of here . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Senator Stanbury . 
many of us are agonizing over this matter . 
the public will look at the record from 1985 to 1997 going into 1998 , showing the kind of attendance that is recorded . 
the public now sees us , because of a perceived technicality in a committee , trying to ensure that we are fair . 
my concern is simply that we are being seen once again to be dithering . 
what happens if the senator is called by the Senate to appear before the committee and he does not appear ? 
does the committee again seek legal opinion , or does it come back with a concrete recommendation to us for expulsion ? 
having a record since 1985 of non - attendance , the public is saying , " That is enough evidence . 
quit your dithering and get it done . " 
i am concerned that we would find another technicality , another reason for not dealing with the issue . 
i believe the public thinks the evidence is quite clear . 
would the honourable senator agree that , once the committee has or has not heard from the senator , it make a firm decision regarding this matter ? 
we cannot afford to continue on forever like this . 
senator Stollery : 
then support the report and we can get going . 
senator Stanbury : 
i know this arises from frustration , and I am frustrated too . 
however , if the Senate wanted to pass the kind of motion that Senator Ghitter has put this afternoon without looking for authority or evidence or background or giving Senator Thompson a chance , it would have done so on December 16 . 
if you do not want anything upon which to base your decision , then you do it immediately . 
that is great , except that you take the consequences . 
what was the job of the committee ? 
if Senator Thompson did not attend , the matter was referred to the committee , and the committee was given two weeks in which to reply . 
we must do the thing properly , and that is what we decided on December 16 . 
we wanted to do it properly . 
we set up the committee . 
the committee is only asking today for power from the Senate to follow that process . 
senator Stratton : 
if I may , honourable senators , we know the history , and I would agree with the history . 
my concern is that if we do what is being recommended and the senator does not turn up next week , the committee will end up in another discussion , and , lo and behold , there is another technicality . 
do you not think that there should be something definitive put to the committee saying that if he fails to show , you must recommend expulsion ? 
senator Stanbury : 
the Senate requires that the committee report with recommendations within two weeks . 
why are you jumping the gun and asking the committee not to do its job ? 
you are the ones who asked the committee to do it , and you are the ones who set the deadline , and that deadline is in two weeks ' time . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I do not think we should get bogged down here . 
the answer to each senator ' s question is in the draft report . 
let me briefly go through them . 
senator Pitfield says we should let the leaders have some time . 
if the report goes forward , they will have time to discuss things . 
senator Lawson has a concern about the legal position , and the committee can deal with that and answer his questions within the next two weeks . 
if Senator Ghitter has a question with respect to the power of the Senate for expulsion , that can be dealt with by the committee as well . 
senator Beaudoin has raised an interesting question with respect to the inherent right and whether or not we have the power , and that can be dealt with at committee as well . 
senator Stratton has a question about concrete results , and the committee will come up with a concrete recommendation . 
i am confident that the chairman will come up with concrete recommendations . 
senator Lynch - Staunton has told us with great persuasion , time and time again , that we should follow the procedures that have been laid down in the rules . 
that procedure is that we delegate the question to the committee , allow the committee to do its work , and then it can come forward with recommendations to let the Senate do its work . 
that is precisely what we have done in that recommendation . 
every concern raised by every senator , including the comments of Senator Pitfield , can be subsumed in that report in two weeks . 
let us get on with it . 
senator Lawson : 
i am persuaded by what Senator Grafstein has said . 
my concern was for fairness and justice . 
because of the haste with which we were proceedings , I felt like we were turning into a lynch mob . 
i am prepared to either amend or withdraw the subamendment , provided that Senator Ghitter is prepared to withdraw his amendment and let it go through the committee process . 
senators Ghitter ' s proposal has had an excellent opportunity to be debated and discussed , and senators have had the opportunity to vent their frustrations , anger and concerns . 
if it would assist the process , I would be prepared to withdraw my subamendment , provided that Senator Ghitter withdraws his amendment , and let the committee go with the process that Senator Grafstein outlined . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am afraid that we are coming into a difficult situation . 
there are some serious technical problems in what we have before us . 
i know the Speaker should not interfere . 
may I suggest a meeting with the leadership for perhaps 15 minutes and a suspension of the session during that time ? 
senator Forrestall : 
that sounds like a good idea . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am afraid that we might end up in a difficult situation which we will regret . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , this side would agree with that proposal . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , how could I turn down such a pleasant invitation ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
do I have the agreement of both sides ? 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I will not be difficult . 
when His Honour asks , " Do I have the agreement of both sides , " you take me as being on this side . 
i am comfortable here , especially with my new seat partner . 
i know I will not be part of the consultation process . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Prud ' homme . 
i try never to overlook any honourable senators . 
while I am aware that the independents do not have large numbers , they do have the power of unanimous consent . 
i ask that leaders on both sides meet in my chamber . 
the bells will ring at 4:30 to resume at 4:35 . 
is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the sitting of the Senate was suspended . 
the sitting of the Senate was resumed . 
senator Carstairs : 
motion agreed to . 
motion to Authorize Clerk of the Senate to Notify Senator Thompson to Appear Before Rules Committee - Debate Adjourned 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notices of Motion : 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) , I move : 
that the Clerk of the Senate be instructed to send a letter to Senator Andrew Thompson ordering him to appear before the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders on Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 7:00 p.m. in Room 160 - S ; and 
that , when available , transcripts of today ' s debates be transmitted to Senator Thompson . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
will this be an in camera meeting or a public meeting ? 
senator Carstairs : 
it will be an open meeting , as was last evening ' s . 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
on the adjournment , is it to a specific time ? 
if not , how do we get it back on the Order Paper ? 
do we have the undertaking of the government that this matter will be dealt with the Thursday following the requested appearance ? 
senator Carstairs : 
the item will appear on the Order Paper tomorrow with wording to the effect that it is by agreement that we will not debate it until we have received the report following Senator Thompson ' s appearance , should he appear before the committee , and any recommendation . 
remember , the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has a limit of two weeks under the standing order of this house of December 16 . 
they must report with all of their recommendations no later than two weeks following the referral of the matter . 
i can give Senator Ghitter our commitment that there will be no extensions to that . 
senator Ghitter : 
honourable senators , I should like to propose an amendment to the effect that the matter be adjourned until the Thursday following the meeting and that my motion would come forward automatically at that time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the question before us at the moment is the motion of Honourable Senator Carstairs that a letter be sent to Senator Thompson . 
it has nothing to do with the other motions that were before us . 
the honourable senator is referring to the other debate , which is adjourned . 
the question is on the proposal to send a letter immediately to Senator Thompson , in addition to the effective part of the rules committee report of today . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
as the agreement to adjourn the debate on Senator Ghitter ' s amendments is obviously tied in with the decision to send Senator Thompson a letter from the Clerk , it is only fair to explain that my understanding of the adjournment of the debate is that it is adjourned from day to day . 
if we wish to debate it tomorrow , we can debate it tomorrow . 
if we do not wish to debate it tomorrow , we stand it . 
however , it remains on the Order Paper and is up for debate day after day until we have disposed of it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
that is my understanding of the decision taken when we met in my chambers . 
senator Ghitter : 
thank you for the clarification . 
i withdraw the amendment . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , where will this notice be sent ? 
we have heard today about due process and fairness . 
we need an understanding of where this notice will be sent . 
my understanding is that senators are to reside in the jurisdiction or region from which they come and that notice to the address within that region should be sufficient . 
what will satisfy the committee as due process on that point ? 
senator Carstairs : 
that is a very good question . 
notice will be sent to his residence in Ontario . 
however , the documents will also be hand - delivered to his residence in La Paz , Mexico . 
senator Thompson cannot have delivery to his office because he does not have an office here . 
motion agreed to . 
motion to Further Direct Consideration of Rules Committee - Debate Suspended 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I further move : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , in their work on the order of December 16 , 1997 , consider all arguments and questions raised in the debates of February 11 , 1998 , and particularly the debate on the amendment proposed by Senator Ghitter . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I think we would like to see more than a consideration of the debate . 
we are hoping to get , and the argument has been going on for two hours , a finding on our legal authority , if any , to follow through on Senator Ghitter ' s amendment or some modification thereof . 
we would hope that the committee not only consider the debate and hopefully get enlightenment from it but that the committee ask for legal advice and bring to us a recommendation as to how far this chamber can go in dealing with a member who - and it seems we are unanimous , at least on this issue - is not entitled to sit here . 
how far can we go to ensure that he is no longer a member of this chamber and , as a result , is no longer entitled to the remuneration that he is being afforded ? 
we should modify the motion accordingly to ensure that the committee understands the intent of this chamber . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I agree . 
if it is agreeable to the chamber , I would amend my motion to add the words : 
... and to hear legal argument based on that debate . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is not enough . 
the committee should also report to the chamber on its authority to deal with Senator Thompson . 
what can we do to see that he is no longer a member of this chamber ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , it will be difficult to get the wording exactly as you want it . 
this matter is not of the same urgency as the sending of the letter to which the Senate has agreed . 
could we agree to hold this motion until tomorrow so that we can provide a proper draft ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
we will leave the motion of Senator Carstairs suspended with the understanding that tomorrow we will come back with a properly worded motion . 
is that agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
business of the Senate 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , there is agreement on the other side - I am sorry I did not have time to discuss this with our independent members - that all remaining items on the Order Paper stand . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is that agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 38 
Thursday , February 12 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late John G . H . Halstead 
tributes 
crisis in Health Care System 
the LATE MR. JUSTICE MARK MCGUIGAN , P . C . , Q . C . 
tributes 
the Senate 
quality of Debate in the Chamber 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
ninth Report of Committee Presented 
the Senate 
status of Senator Andrew Thompson - Motion to Refer Subject - Matter to Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders Committee for Further Consideration - Consideration Suspended to Later this Day 
adjournment 
parliamentary Conference of the Americas 
report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
rights of the Unborn Child 
establishment of Special Joint Parliamentary Committee - Notice of Motion 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Notice of Inquiry 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
agriculture 
wheat Board - Amount of Unpaid Balance Owing - Government Position 
the Economy 
decline in Disposable Incomes - Possibility of Tax Cut - Government Position 
fisheries and Oceans 
snow Crab Harvest in Gulf of St. Lawrence - Possibility of Allocation from Next Year ' s Quota to New Brunswick Inshore Fishers - Government Position 
national Defence 
awarding of Contracts for Mid - Life Overhaul of Aurora Aircraft - Possibility of Direction of Contracts to Nova Scotia Contractors - Government Position 
Iraq 
agriculture 
Razing of Abandoned Grain Elevators on Prairies - Loss of Storage Capacity - Effect on Rural Municipalities - Government Position 
the Economy 
tax Breaks for Low Income Canadians and Senior Citizens - Possible Increase in Basic Personal Exemption - Government Position 
health 
withdrawal of Federal Transfers from Provinces - Effect on Standards of Delivery Systems - Government Position 
national Defence 
efficacy of Anthrax Vaccine Destined for Use on Military Personnel En Route to Persian Gulf - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
cardinal Ambrozic 
motion to Convey Felicitations of Senate on Appointment of His Eminence 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Examine Governance Provisions of Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
the Senate 
the SENATE 
Thursday , February 12 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late John G . H . Halstead 
tributes 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , sometimes there comes a moment to pause and reflect on the origins of Canada ' s foreign policy that is so active and so respected in all corners of the globe . 
over 70 years ago , a small circle of scholarly , brilliant young bureaucrats , under the tutelage of O . D . Skelton , were gathered by Mr. King as an adjunct to the Privy Council Office in the East Block , just a few steps away from this chamber , to create an independent foreign service . 
they were chosen because they were bright , young , vital , well - travelled , brilliant scholars and athletes who shared common values as sons of the manse or sons of missionaries . 
to themselves and others , they were simply " the brightest and the best . " 
all were imbued with the social purpose gained by their faith . 
all sought to put their values of private morality into public practice in politics and diplomacy , as their parents had in their church . 
notions of morality lay at the heart of their principles and policies . 
the standards of excellence and honesty they set for themselves and others made them exemplars of the public service culminating in the rise and career of one of their own , Lester B . Pearson , public servant , diplomat , Nobel laureate and Prime Minister . 
such was the life of John Halstead who died in Ottawa last Monday at age 76 . 
John was born in Vancouver , educated at UBC and the London School of Economics . 
during the war , he served as a naval officer in naval intelligence in the North Atlantic , Britain and Germany . 
his skills in German led him to the interrogation of U - boat prisoners and , after the war , naval elements of the German high command , tracking down suspected war criminals . 
on his return to Canada , he joined the foreign service . 
in his 36 - year career as a public servant , which spanned most of the Cold War , he rose rapidly in the Department of External Affairs from Assistant Undersecretary , to Ambassador to Germany , and then to NATO . 
John was a superb writer and a strategic thinker . 
John ' s career included stints as visiting professor and lecturer at Georgetown , Carleton , Queen ' s , Dalhousie , Windsor , think tanks in the United States and universities in Germany . 
he was an active member of the Institute of Strategic Studies . 
however , John ' s great love was Europe , NATO and Germany . 
John and I shared a deep interest in German literature and history . 
it was in this latter capacity that I came to know him as a member of the Atlantik Brucke . 
for over a decade , we met annually in Canada or Germany to discuss Canada - German and - European relations . 
when he was awarded the Order of Canada in 1996 , he said the following : 
government is not there to make a profit . 
government is there to serve the people who elected it . 
John would always think ahead with clarity and concision . 
i offer my condolences to his wife , Jean , and his son Christopher . 
canada and the foreign service will be diminished by his death , as we are all by his loss . 
he will be sorely missed by his many friends throughout North America and across Europe . 
Godspeed , John . 
crisis in Health Care System 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the declining level of federal support in New Brunswick is putting our health care system in jeopardy . 
this is a matter of great concern . 
last week alone , in four editions of Saint John newspapers , these headlines cried out from the front pages : 
crumbling Health Care 
exhausted Doctors Seek Relief 
medical Cutbacks Hit Home 
doctors Will Plea For Help 
beyond the borders of New Brunswick , during the same week we heard similar sentiments expressed in Montreal , where the backlog of elective surgery patients was reaching crisis proportion . 
Ontario was appointing a task force to investigate the growing number of problems in their health care system . 
it is becoming increasingly clear to all Canadians that the steady decline in federal government support has all but pulled the rug from under our valued health care system . 
in a December 8 , 1997 press release , Finance Minister Paul Martin declared that , " Governing is about choices , priorities and values . " 
what the Minister of Finance failed to mention was that , since 1993 , his government has cut cash transfers for health , education and social assistance by roughly $ 6.3 billion , from $ 18.8 billion to $ 12.5 billion . 
in seven of Canada ' s ten provinces , cash transfers will continue to fall over the next five years . 
in fact , the seven less wealthy provinces will lose a further $ 384 million per year by the year 2002 . 
this is the problem . 
honourable senators , we must realize that " bare minimum " spending in the area of health care has very human consequences . 
in the words of Dr. Gregg MacLean , president of the Saint John Medical Society : 
the problem is ... underfunding . 
we see those wait lists just growing and the increasing frustration on the part of the surgeons and the family doctors who have to face the patients every day and tell them that the surgery is delayed and try to explain why they can ' t have it . 
honourable colleagues , increased patient suffering , under - equipped and understaffed hospitals and ever - growing waiting lists are all the evidence we need to conclude that our cherished public health care system is crumbling . 
the LATE MR. JUSTICE MARK MCGUIGAN , P . C . , Q . C . 
tributes 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , a few weeks ago the Honourable Justice Mark McGuigan departed this world . 
he was born on Prince Edward Island in 1931 . 
he studied law at Osgoode Hall and Columbia University . 
a law professor and dean , he excelled in his university career . 
elected to the House of Commons in 1968 , and re - elected in 1972 , 1974 , 1979 and 1980 , he became Minister of External Affairs in 1980 and , thereafter , Minister of Justice in 1982 . 
after an academic career , followed by a political career , he started a judicial career . 
in 1984 he was appointed to the Federal Court of Appeal of Canada . 
he was a very learned judge , and his judgments will be remembered . 
in 1995 , he was awarded the Walter Tarnopolsky Medal for Human Rights for his work in the field of human rights and freedoms . 
in 1972 , he co - chaired , with Senator Molgat , a joint committee of the Senate and the House of Commons on constitutional reform . 
mark McGuigan was a jurist and a scholar of the very first order , a parliamentarian with creative imagination , a recognized authority on constitutional law and human rights , an impressive judge with great knowledge of the law , and possessing good judgment and , finally , a philosopher . 
the Senate 
quality of Debate in the Chamber 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I rise to offer my congratulations to all those who took part in the debate yesterday afternoon . 
i did not take part myself , so I had the opportunity to listen . 
i do not think I have ever heard a better debate than I heard yesterday . 
i am talking here of all of those who participated ; I will not single anyone out . 
i think that the quality of the debate , in terms of the vigour and the articulate nature of the reasoned debate that we heard , was a credit to this institution . 
what happened yesterday was perhaps a defining moment for us . 
we analyzed ourselves and our powers . 
it may be that Senator Thompson was a lightning rod , but sometimes lightning can have a beneficial and useful purpose . 
the debate we had yesterday had a beneficial and useful purpose . 
i congratulate both the committee that brought forth their report , and also Senator Ghitter . 
all those who spoke were well - meaning , whether it was a question of now , later or how we should do it ; that is what we tried to define yesterday . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call for the tabling of documents , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in our galleries of a group of students from the University of Vermont . 
they are participating in the Canadian Studies Program . 
they are here on their forty - second annual Spring field trip to Ottawa . 
for the last few years their host in Ottawa has been Senator Prud ' homme , who took over from our former colleague Senator Heath Macquarrie , after his retirement . 
on behalf of the Senate and all senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
ninth Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 12 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
ninth REPORT 
your committee has examined and approved the Senate Estimates for the fiscal year 1998 - 99 and recommends their adoption . 
the Expenditure Plan 1998 - 99 and a summary accompanies this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Senate 
status of Senator Andrew Thompson - Motion to Refer Subject - Matter to Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders Committee for Further Consideration - Consideration Suspended to Later this Day 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , I move : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders take into consideration the Senate debate of February 11 on its interim report related to its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 , particularly with respect to the amendment that was moved ; 
that the committee be authorized to obtain the advice of legal counsel in the matter of the power of the Senate to expel , suspend or otherwise deprive Senator Thompson of his seat in the Senate ; and the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity and expense allowance , whether his current status as a member of the Senate is modified or not , and ; 
that the committee submit its recommendations thereon as soon as possible or , in any case , no later than when it presents its final report on February 24 , 1998 on its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , when are we to take this matter into consideration ? 
senator Kinsella : 
however , this is a motion that you are making now . 
perhaps we could have the debate on the motion a bit later today , in order to give us a chance to study it . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposistion ) : 
we do not have copies of the motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
shall we start by agreeing whether leave is granted ? 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Kinsella : 
yes , later this day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
we have agreed that leave is granted . 
perhaps we could revert to this order later this day , at which time I would ask the Honourable Senator Carstairs to again make the motion ? 
it would then be properly before us . 
is that agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
a copy of the motion could be provided to all senators . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
yes , we will ask that a copy of the motion be sent to all senators in the meantime . 
adjournment 
honourable Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until next Tuesday , February 17 , at two o ' clock in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
parliamentary Conference of the Americas 
report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the report by the Parliament of Canada ' s delegation to the Conference of the Americas , held in Quebec City from September 18 to 21 , 1997 . 
rights of the Unborn Child 
establishment of Special Joint Parliamentary Committee - Notice of Motion 
hon. Stanley Haidasz : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on February 25 , 1998 , I shall move : 
that a Special Joint Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons , to be styled the Special Joint Committee on the Unborn Child , be appointed to examine and report upon the feasibility of legislating in the area of fetal rights and the protection to the unborn child , with particular reference to : 
( a ) the lack of protection in current Canadian law of the unborn child ; 
( b ) the interests of the state in providing some measures to protect the unborn child , thereby securing the well - being of future generations of Canadians ; 
( c ) the application of the rights and freedoms entrenched in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and how they relate to the unborn child ; 
( d ) the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in the 1997 case , Winnipeg Child and Family Services ( Northwest Area ) v. G . ( D . F . ) , which signaled a gap in current Canadian law respecting the rights of the unborn ; and 
( e ) the comments made by the Supreme Court of Canada , in the above - noted case , that any measures to provide protection in law to the unborn child have complex ramifications and , as such , should be considered by Parliament , not the Canadian courts , since Parliament is in a better position to assess the desirability , the impact and the consequences of such measures ; 
that the committee take into consideration Canadian and international law , and in particular , the Criminal Code amendment , in 1969 , to the homicide provision concerning the killing of a child before or during its birth ; 
that the committee report back to Parliament with proposed alternative measures to protect the unborn child in a manner that is consistent with the Constitution of Canada ; 
that the committee also make recommendations to Parliament respecting the desirability of establishing further studies and inquiries into the feasibility of legislating restrictions in the area of experimental treatment of the fetus and of new reproductive technologies ; 
that the committee be composed of seven members of the House of Commons and six members of the Senate ; 
that a quorum of the committee be six members , provided both Houses are represented ; 
that the committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the committee have the power to retain the services of expert , professional , technical and clerical staff ; 
that the committee have the power to report to Parliament from time to time and that it present its final report no later than December 31 , 2000 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons requesting that House to unite with this house for the above purpose and to select , if the House of Commons deems it advisable , members to act on the proposed special joint committee . 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , February 17 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to Canada ' s policy respecting the Iraq crisis . 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , February 18 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to its lack of full accessibility to Canadians with disabilities , and to a means for dealing with disability issues . 
question PERIOD 
agriculture 
wheat Board - Amount of Unpaid Balance Owing - Government Position 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate relating to grain sales by the Canadian Wheat Board to various countries . 
there has been a great debate in the Prairies about how much money is now owing on the accounts for such sales . 
numbers of up to $ 20 billion , $ 6 billion and $ 8 billion have been mentioned . 
what is the unpaid balance owing to the Canadian Wheat Board at this time , and who carries the expense if their should be a loss ? 
is it the farmers , the government , or the Canadian Wheat Board ? 
if it is the Canadian Wheat Board , then it is the farmers . 
is interest being paid on the money that is owing ? 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
round it to the nearest billion . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that kind of question , obviously , as the honourable senator understands , will require some research not only on my part but on the part of the appropriate authorities . 
i will bring a complete answer at the earliest possible date . 
having said that , legislation is being introduced in the other place relating to the Wheat Board , Bill C - 4 . 
when that bill arrives at the Senate , that will give us an excellent opportunity to examine the Wheat Board and the costs involved , and any payments that are due or overdue in full detail . 
the Economy 
decline in Disposable Incomes - Possibility of Tax Cut - Government Position 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
since this government was elected in the fall of 1993 , incomes have stood still in real , after - tax terms . 
indeed , according to research from the Library of Parliament , if you take out inflation , per capita personal disposable income has actually fallen by three - tenths of a percentage point since this government was elected . 
in comparison , per capita personal disposable income has climbed by 7.1 per cent in the United States in real terms over the same period . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as the honourable senator knows , traditionally there has been a difference in after - tax incomes between Canada and the United States . 
having said that , I know that the Honourable Senator Jessiman , who keeps track of such indicators assiduously , will recognize that all of the other income indicators are on the rise in Canada . 
one of the reasons we are in such a healthy state is that the income indicators are on the rise , and have been for some considerable period of time . 
fisheries and Oceans 
snow Crab Harvest in Gulf of St. Lawrence - Possibility of Allocation from Next Year ' s Quota to New Brunswick Inshore Fishers - Government Position 
hon. Fernand Robichaud ( Saint - Louis - de - Kent ) : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
new Brunswick ' s inshore fishers are worried and living in uncertainty . 
the lobster fishery is declining and , for the most part , this is the fishery they rely on . 
as the minister knows , inshore fishers have had access to the snow crab fishery in the Gulf of St. Lawrence in recent years . 
given that inshore fishers have already taken snow crab and have managed the small share granted them well , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us whether inshore fishers will be returning to fish snow crab in the Gulf next season ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as a former Minister of State for Fisheries and as an individual representative who has followed these issues carefully , Honourable Senator Robichaud knows that , in recent years , the Gulf crab resource has been shared with inshore fisheries on what has been regarded as a temporary basis . 
this sharing was based on established principles of conservation , viability of the existing license - holders and no permanent increase in harvesting capacity . 
if I remember correctly , for 1997 until the year 2001 , the department approved a co - management arrangement with southern Gulf crab fishers . 
this includes a sharing regime for non - crab fishers based on a viability threshold for the traditional fleet . 
the level of sharing each year depends on the price of crab and on the total allowable catch . 
senator Robichaud : 
could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us whether the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans is now considering setting aside a coastal zone for snow crab fishers ? 
inshore fishers have requested this for a number of years now . 
perhaps the minister is considering a permanent quota for inshore fishers , with due consideration , of course , for the best measures for conserving the snow crab stock . 
senator Graham : 
i believe the answer to the first part of the honourable senator ' s question is in the affirmative . 
i do not know about a permanent arrangement , but I know that the minister is awaiting the final scientific advice . 
he is awaiting a report from an independent committee which was established , as well as input from the industry itself , before he makes any decisions on the 1998 fishery , including sharing with non - crab fishers . 
i will bring that information forward to my honourable friend as soon as it becomes available . 
national Defence 
awarding of Contracts for Mid - Life Overhaul of Aurora Aircraft - Possibility of Direction of Contracts to Nova Scotia Contractors - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
approximately two days ago , we heard from this government , by way of a press release , that yet another contract for the mid - life overhaul of the CP - 140 Aurora has now been let , this time to Array Systems Computing Inc. of Toronto , Ontario , for $ 1.5 million . 
is this another attempt to tender this contract in piecemeal fashion and away from its possible direction toward the life extension program team in Nova Scotia where a fledgling , though very competent , aviation industrial base is developing ? 
could the minister tell me whether this action precludes a call on the federal authority to direct the balance of the Aurora mid - life overhaul to a team of Nova Scotia and Atlantic aviation firms ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I applaud Senator Forrestall again for his continuing interest in the aeronautics industry , particularly as it relates to his own region of the country . 
i assure him that any contracts awarded would have been awarded on the basis of merit and would be totally transparent . 
any award would not prohibit any further action - nor should it - with respect to what is being done or being planned in Nova Scotia or in other provinces with respect to developing an aeronautics industry . 
senator Forrestall : 
the minister seems to have forgotten our series of questions about this matter several months ago . 
what we have here is a drop in the bucket , as far as the aviation industry in Canada generally is concerned . 
it would lend significant support to the several thousands of people already in the aviation industrial complex . 
at that time , we discussed the possibility of government , in their wisdom , looking at the fledgling industrial base and directing that contract to the overall team already in place . 
that team has been in place for some time . 
that was the point , namely to direct the contract and not to put it out in a piecemeal fashion until its work was diminished to the point of having no lead contract and no local base for the mid - life overhaul . 
is it too late for the government to direct that contract to that Nova Scotian team so that the industrial base might benefit ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I do not know that the answer would be any different if it was asked yesterday or today , two hours into a pre - election period . 
i am sure the honourable senator will agree that the bidding process must be totally transparent . 
whether or not it is possible , in particular cases , to direct a contract in order to support a developing , burgeoning , aeronautics industry in a particular province , that is something else again . 
senator Forrestall : 
would you like a list of precedents ? 
senator Graham : 
if there are precedents , I would be glad to receive them to support my argument on behalf of our region along with my colleague ' s . 
i will await with keen anticipation , and not astounded amazement , for any help or representations that Senator Forrestall might give me in the representations which I will make vigorously to my colleagues who are responsible for awarding such contracts . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I provided such a list a few months ago . 
the Leader of the Government did not see fit to act on it then . 
we are now on a different footing . 
this is one of the major opportunities for provinces like Nova Scotia to stand up and insist that we benefit from the central pot . 
here is an opportunity . 
the leader knows that the government can direct that contract . 
there is an election on . 
let us do something for Nova Scotians . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
Iraq 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
honourable senators may recall my question on Tuesday of this week with reference to my concern about the strategic bombing of sites in Iraq and the possible releasing of toxic materials , should such bombing take place on those sites . 
yesterday , The New York Times printed a letter to the editor , the headline of which reads : " Bombing Iraq May Unleash a Toxic Threat . " 
the article states : 
if the United States and Britain undertake a bombing campaign against Iraq , targets will probably include suspected chemical and biological weapons factories and stockpiles . 
yet attacks on these sites might release plumes of biological or chemical toxins into the air . 
my question is : 
has the Government of Canada done any kind of risk analysis on the release of such toxins , whether biological or chemical , should bombing be directed at targets or sites where there is a store of these biological and chemical weapons ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i do not believe the letter to the editor in The New York Times is anything new or provides any news to people who understand the terrible situation that we face in that part of the world . 
i am confident that strategic analysis is ongoing and has been the subject of discussions between world leaders such as President Clinton , Prime Minister Blair , Prime Minister Chr é tien , and so on . 
as I indicated yesterday , this has been the subject of ongoing discussions between our diplomats at home and around the world . 
agriculture 
Razing of Abandoned Grain Elevators on Prairies - Loss of Storage Capacity - Effect on Rural Municipalities - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
the concern is that they are refusing to sell their abandoned elevators to willing buyers , either farmers who wish to use them or municipalities who wish to lease them to local cooperatives . 
instead , they are tearing them down and burning them . 
will the Leader of the Government ask his colleague to investigate the serious concerns that rural municipalities have expressed about this situation ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , without having the advantage of discussing this previously with Minister Vanclief , I am not able to give an answer . 
i am sure he is monitoring the situation ; what he is doing about it is another matter . 
i would be happy to bring this issue to the minister ' s attention immediately after the session is adjourned . 
on other occasions when I have raised matters with Minister Vanclief , he has acted on them promptly and I am sure he will do so in this instance . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
the previous Minister of Agriculture , in his wide - ranging study on the future of agriculture , was particularly concerned about rural development . 
my concern deals with de - population . 
as the elevators and the short lines disappear , the towns might disappear . 
the one other thing I wish to bring to the attention of the Leader of the Government is that the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities just passed a resolution concerning this issue . 
their solution is that they be allowed to expropriate these elevators on the last day of closure , including the equipment , and then they would have the power to operate them or sell them to locally formed cooperatives or to use them for grain storage or for car - loading by the area farmers . 
farmers consider this a serious issue . 
i would be most grateful if the leader would convey that information to the minister . 
senator Graham : 
the information that Senator Spivak has just conveyed with respect to a resolution passed by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities with respect to expropriation seems to be a logical and sensible course to follow . 
i shall bring a more complete answer to the honourable senator as soon as possible . 
the Economy 
tax Breaks for Low Income Canadians and Senior Citizens - Possible Increase in Basic Personal Exemption - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government . 
shortly before Christmas , Statistics Canada released some shocking news about incomes in Canada , especially about those in the low income bracket . 
the government currently collects $ 200 million a year in income taxes from persons earning less than $ 10,000 a year . 
is the government giving any consideration to using the so - called fiscal dividend to remove low income Canadians from tax rolls , specifically through an increase in the basic personal exemption ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure that is being considered . 
i would suggest we all wait to hear from the Minister of Finance in his February 24 budget . 
senator LeBreton : 
i will try to give the government a few good ideas , then . 
a trend had developed whereby the number of senior citizens classified as being in a low income bracket had begun to fall . 
indeed , statistics show that seniors in this bracket fell from 34 per cent in 1980 to 18.7 per cent in 1995 . 
increasing the basic personal exemption would remove a burden from a great many seniors , and it is to be hoped that the government will act to ease the situation for our senior citizens . 
is the minister able to give our seniors some hope on this front ? 
senator Graham : 
although the system continues to be sound , it is coming under increasing pressures that require change to ensure its long - term sustainability and affordability . 
in terms of economic pressures , we have costs that are escalating rapidly because of demographic trends , a change to economic environment with slower economic growth and higher interest rates than when the system was put in place . 
withdrawal of Federal Transfers from Provinces - Effect on Standards of Delivery Systems - Government Position 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i know that the honourable senator ' s province , like mine , is among the seven provinces that will continue to experience drastic cuts in funding by the government over the next five years , which will affect our health care services . 
yet both his provincial government and mine are expected to uphold the Canada Health Act . 
can the Leader of the Government advise this chamber as to how the level of service required by the act can be maintained given the withdrawal of these federal transfers ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , we are living in a period of economic restraint . 
we are attempting to balance the budget . 
the Minister of Finance has said that when the budget is balanced , we will devote 50 per cent of the fiscal dividend to reducing the overall debt and 50 per cent to social programs . 
i would hope that a significant amount of that would go to the kinds of health care delivery systems to which my honourable friend is referring . 
national Defence 
efficacy of Anthrax Vaccine Destined for Use on Military Personnel En Route to Persian Gulf - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a question that is related to health care , but one which is particularly pertinent to the troops that are presently on their way to the Persian Gulf . 
we have just been informed that the United States has developed a vaccine against anthrax which takes six weeks to take effect . 
as this is one of the greatest potential threats to Canada ' s military force now moving towards the Persian Gulf , could the minister tell this chamber if this is true ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my honourable friend is bringing news to me . 
i know that anthrax vaccine is being made available and that all those who will be representing Canada in that area of the world , for the purposes we have already discussed , will be inoculated on or before February 17 . 
with respect to the time that it takes for the vaccine to take effect , I am not in a position to comment , obviously , for lack of knowledge . 
senator Stratton : 
honourable senators , I hope the military leaders know what they are doing . 
the military forces are now sailing , on their way to the Persian Gulf . 
that is the concern . 
if this is true - and known by the authorities - how could it have been forgotten ? 
senator Graham : 
the honourable senator raises a valid point . 
i am sure that if this is news to the authorities , they will take it into consideration in any actions that may be taken in the future . 
senator Berntson : 
postpone the war ! 
senator Stratton : 
does the Leader of the Government not think it would be appropriate to determine fairly quickly how this is being dealt with ? 
it would appear that there are lives at stake here , and in considerable numbers . 
senator Graham : 
i am sure it is a concern to every honourable senator in this chamber . 
i shall add the honourable senator ' s voice , and my own , to the concerns which have already been expressed by people who are much more knowledgeable on this subject than myself , and probably Senator Stratton as well . 
orders OF THE DAY 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the consideration of the Final Report of the Special Committee of the Senate on Post - Secondary Education , tabled in the Senate on December 16 , 1997 . - ( 
honourable Senator Forest ) 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , I would like the motion to remain in the name of Senator Forest , but I would like to speak to it today . 
i am pleased to speak today to the report on post - secondary education in Canada . 
first off , I would like to acknowledge the contribution of the committee chair , Senator Lorne Bonnell , who has done an excellent job for over a year now . 
senator Bonnell was well aware of the problems facing our Canadian universities and our Canadian students . 
he had come to realize that the state of our post - secondary education was deteriorating , and that all Canadians were affected by this . 
his contribution to raising awareness of the ongoing problems facing Canadian students goes beyond this report . 
more and more , Canadians are becoming distraught as they realize that we are facing a major crisis . 
i think Senator Bonnell accomplished what he intended to do , and I sincerely thank him for his great work and wish him the best . 
thanks to this report , we have an up - to - date view of the Canadian post - secondary education system . 
it indicates , however , that much remains to be done . 
students ' financial situation was the focus of much of the testimony during the committee ' s deliberations , but we must not lose sight of the intangible advantages of a post - secondary education . 
it broadens an individual ' s horizons without limit . 
educated people benefit the rest of the population in a thousand ways . 
student debt has made the headlines in all the media for more than a year , and with good reason . 
no other single issue was of such concern to the witnesses who appeared before the committee . 
committee members did their best to look at important issues such as international education , student mobility and the quality of instruction , but none of these subjects was as pressing and important as the level of student debt . 
indeed , since 1990 , the average debt load of students who receive loans under government programs has risen from $ 8,700 to a figure that should hit $ 25,000 this year . 
are these excessive amounts for a student from an average Canadian family ? 
i am sure you will all agree with me that this is an exorbitant figure . 
with the prospect of such future debts , you will agree that it is hard to convince families who can afford to do so to put money aside to educate their children and for long - term adult education . 
i am delighted with this new initiative which was designed to be completely independent of the government and to make it easier for low - and middle - income families in particular to have access to post - secondary institutions . 
young Canadians with lower incomes are greatly in need of such initiatives at this time , to help them to enter and pursue the post - secondary studies which have become so essential these days . 
in my opinion , these scholarships ought to be awarded in two categories , one for financial need and one for academic merit . 
as far as R & D is concerned , we heard many cries of alarm because we are falling noticeably behind in this area . 
witnesses all regretted the lack of effort by Canada in the area of R & D compared to the other industrialized countries and to its major economic partners . 
Sweden , for example , earmarked 3.26 per cent of its GDP for research and development , while the figure for Canada was 1.5 per cent . 
many newspapers deplore the fact that so many brilliant Canadian researchers are moving south of the border to pursue their careers . 
but the United States devoted 2.66 per cent of its gross national product to research and development , and supported 7.4 researchers per 1000 in the labour force . 
canada , with its meagre 1.5 per cent , supported only 4.7 per 1000 in the labour force . 
canada is still lagging behind all the major OECD countries except Italy . 
the recommendation that follows is one of the benchmarks the committee tried to present in its report . 
i quote : 
that the Federal Government make a long - term , strategic and detailed commitment to funding research and development in post - secondary institutions by : 
( a ) committing to the immediate goal of raising Canada ' s investment in research and development to the average of the other OECD member countries within five years . 
this will be no easy task . 
the objectives of the various provincial governments tend to vary from province to province . 
i sincerely believe , however , that Canadians do not need to be convinced of the benefit to our society of having high quality post - secondary institutions . 
our universities must be repositories of knowledge . 
several of our recommendations call for a more prominent leadership role by the federal government with respect to matters respecting post - secondary education that are deemed to be in the national interest . 
throughout the committee ' s deliberations , I realized how great a need there was for the provinces and territories to deal with a single agency created to ensure that the objectives of and results obtained at the University of Moncton compare with those of the University of Saskatchewan . 
we are therefore proposing a special agency which would serve as a locus of internal coordination and external articulation . 
such an agency would help the government better play its role in post - secondary education . 
the report says , and I quote : 
... such a mechanism would provide the Federal Government with a source of strategic advice in this area of critical national importance and would send a powerful signal that Parliament recognizes its significance . 
an interesting section of the report underscores clearly the situation of universities located in regions where francophones constitute a minority . 
new Brunswick and Ontario are the two main areas , but the situation is true in Nova Scotia , Prince Edward Island , Manitoba and Alberta too . 
the report provides , and I quote : 
the support share they receive from the provincial governments and the federal government almost universally lags behind the relative size of the local francophone population , and they lack the funds to develop as many new courses as are needed . 
... the francophone minorities ' universities and colleges in Canada are very concerned that , because they are relatively small and recently established , their needs will not be met . 
the members of the special committee , however , believe that these institutions should be treated as the capstone of the French - language school system outside Quebec . 
and the report recommends , and I quote : 
that the federal government ensure that the funding assistance offered to minority language post - secondary institutions take into account the special needs of francophone minority institutions for additional funding to allow them to catch up to the range of programs offered in other colleges and universities . 
all of the members of the special committee urge the federal government to act quickly to meet the needs of the francophone minority post - secondary institutions in Canada . 
in this connection , honourable senators , I would like to speak if I may of the Universit é de Moncton , a New Brunswick university which serves a population pool of francophones who are mainly from that province . 
in fact , 90 per cent of the 6,000 students on the three campuses of the Universit é de Moncton are from New Brunswick . 
these three campuses , which are situated respectively in Moncton in the southeast of the province , Shippagan in the northeast , and Edmunston in the northwest , represent more than mere university campuses for the people in those regions . 
thanks to their involvement and lead role in the community , the three Universit é de Moncton campuses provide francophones with the opportunity to benefit from these centres with their strong community presence . 
that is why I shall always back the concept of a three - campus Universit é de Moncton . 
i sincerely believe that the Universit é de Moncton deserves our attention and our assistance so that it may broaden its influence throughout the francophone community , whether in Acadia , in Canada or elsewhere in the world . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , very simply , I shall repeat the three points I see as the keynotes of this report : first , financial assistance to Canadian students , who are in great need of help to lighten their financial burdens ; second , an increase in the amounts allocated to R & D in order to slow down the brain drain of our best researchers into neighbouring countries ; and last but not least , particular assistance for the French - language universities in minority francophone communities , so that they can help the Canadian francophonie to flourish . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I move adjournment of the debate in the name of Senator Andreychuk . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the order stood in the name of the Honourable Senator Forest , and the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool had permission to speak . 
if no other senator wishes to speak at this time , I suggest that we leave this item on the Order Paper in the name of the Honourable Senator Forest . 
senator Kinsella : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Forest , debate adjourned . 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
to deal with such incidents , this bill would authorize customs officers to effect arrests . 
they would not be armed . 
the RCMP would back them up , if necessary . 
this is a delicate issue . 
there are legal , administrative and Charter implications . 
it should be studied carefully in each of its details by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
cardinal Ambrozic 
motion to Convey Felicitations of Senate on Appointment of His Eminence 
hon. Stanley Haidasz , pursuant to notice of February 10 , 1998 , moved : 
honourable senators , it was with great jubilation and pride that members of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Toronto received in January , this year , the happy news that His Holiness John Paul II had appointed to the College of Cardinals , His Grace Archbishop Aloysius Ambrozic . 
this great distinction has come to an eminent Canadian of Toronto , who arrived in this country as a refugee from Slovenia . 
excelling in his studies at institutions of higher learning , he was later appointed rector of St. Michael ' s College of the University of Toronto , which he served with distinction . 
this stalwart shepherd and pragmatic ecumenist , with deep familiarity of the pulse of a great cross - section of Canadian society , has earned great confidence and respect . 
furthermore , the cardinal elect was always interested in the deliberations of Parliament and especially of the Senate during our great debates on life issues . 
i recall vividly his telephone conversation with me on that occasion , seeking further information and clarification on these issues and the proposed legislation . 
his many achievements and his valued service to the church have been recognized by His Holiness John Paul II , elevating him to the status of Cardinal and Prince of the Roman Catholic Church . 
therefore , honourable senators , I urge that you support this motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Examine Governance Provisions of Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , for Senator Kirby , pursuant to notice of February 10 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce be authorized to examine and report upon the governance provisions set out in the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act ( previously Bill C - 2 ) ; 
that the committee be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings ; 
that the committee be authorized to adjourn from place to place in Canada for the purpose of pursuing its study ; 
that the committee be authorized to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary ; and 
that the committee present its final report no later than March 31 , 1998 . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate 
on the Order : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders take into consideration the Senate debate of February 11 on its interim report related to its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 , particularly with respect to the amendment that was moved ; 
that the committee be authorized to obtain the advice of legal counsel in the matter of the power of the Senate to expel , suspend or otherwise deprive Senator Thompson of his seat in the Senate ; and the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity and expense allowance , whether his current status as a member of the Senate is modified or not , and ; 
that the committee submit its recommendations thereon as soon as possible or , in any case , no later than when it presents its final report on February 24 , 1998 on its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i understand there has been agreement to some small changes . 
perhaps we could clarify the situation . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , after distribution of the motion , I received from our resident " Editor - in - chief of the Senate , " Senator Doyle , some editorial corrections to the motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
first , are the editorial changes agreeable to honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , in my view , the first paragraph in the French text is incorrect . 
i will read it to illustrate my point : 
it seems to me that the second line should instead read : 
... tienne compte des d é bats du S é nat du 11 f é vrier sur son rapport provisoire suivant son ordre de renvoi du 16 d é cembre 1997 . 
otherwise , it sounds like the interim report has yet to be written when in fact it is already before us . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , are there any other comments on Senator Corbin ' s suggestion to substitute the word " sur " for the word " dans " ? 
hon. No ë l Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if we compare it to the English text , I wonder whether it would not be better to use the conjunction " et " and not the preposition " sur , " because the English version uses the word " and . " 
hon. G é rald - A . 
Beaudoin : 
when the French reads : 
... tienne compte des d é bats du S é nat du 11 f é vrier ... 
it relates to the interim report ; the debate is about the report . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
not exclusively . 
senator Corbin : 
the report was about the report . 
senator Beaudoin : 
the word " relatif " covers all the debates relating to the report . 
it is all - inclusive . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we only have two weeks . 
senator Beaudoin : 
i suggest " relatif . " 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
everything is relative . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i have several suggestions . 
the last would be that we change the word " dans , " instead of using " relatif , " in which case it should read " relatif à " ce rapport . 
is that acceptable ? 
senator Beaudoin : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
we will remove the word " dans " and substitute " relatif à " ce rapport . 
is there agreement ? 
senator Beaudoin : 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
would this solve the problem ? 
is it agreed ? 
everyone agrees . 
we must proceed with the motion . 
it was moved by Senator Carstairs , seconded by Senator Atkins , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders take into consideration the Senate debate of February 11 and its interim report related to its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 , particularly with respect to the amendment that was moved ; 
that the committee be authorized to obtain further advice of legal counsel in the matter of the power of the Senate to expel , suspend or otherwise deprive Senator Thompson of his seat in the Senate ; and the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity and expense allowance , determine whether his current status as a member of the Senate is modified or not ; and 
that the committee submit its recommendations thereon as soon as possible or , in any case , no later than when it presents its final report on February 24 , 1998 , on its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 . 
would you like me to read the French ? 
il est propos é par l ' honorable s é nateur Carstairs , appuy é par l ' honorable s é nateur Bacon , avec la permission du S é nat et nonobstant l ' alin é a 58 ( 1 ) f ) du R è glement du S é nat , 
que le comit é permanent des privil è ges , du R è glement et de la proc é dure tienne compte des d é bats du S é nat du 11 f é vrier et de son rapport provisoire suivant son ordre de renvoi du 16 d é cembre 1997 , particuli è rement en ce qui concerne la modification qui a é t é propos é e ; 
que le comit é soit autoris é à obtenir l ' avis d ' un conseiller juridique sur la question du pouvoir du S é nat d ' expulser , de suspendre ou de priver autrement le s é nateur Thompson du si è ge qu ' il occupe au S é nat et de sa capacit é de retenir son indemnit é de session et son allocation pour frais , que son statut actuel de membre du S é nat soit modif é ou non ; et 
que le comit é pr é sente ses recommandations à ce sujet le plus t ô t possible ou au plus tard le 24 f é vrier 1998 , lorsqu ' il d é posera son rapport final sur son ordre de renvoi du 16 d é cembre 1997 . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , unfortunately I detect an inconsistency between the French and English in the fourth paragraph where we use the word " determine " in English , whereas in French , we use " quelque soit son statut ... " 
why is the word " determine " in there ? 
we are not asking for a determination . 
we are asking about the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity , whatever his current status as a member may be . 
that is , rather than determine his status , we must decide , whatever his status , what we can do regarding his indemnities . 
in French , it is correct the way I heard Your Honour read it , but in English the word " determine " slipped in and , on rereading that , it does not seem to fit . 
senator Maheu : 
i agree with Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i assume that we are now on a point of order on the text so that there may be some free discussion . 
in the French , I wonder if " obtenir l ' avis additionnel " needs to be added . 
i do not know . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i will take the last proposal first . 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Kinsella that the following be added to the French text in the second paragraph , in fact the third : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton questions the English text and proposes that , instead of saying " determine whether his current status , " we would say " whatever his current status . " 
is that agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is agreed that that is the final text . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Maheu : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
on division , then . 
senator Maheu : 
honourable Senator Joyal would like to see something else corrected , and I would like him to explain it , rather than me . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have called the motion . 
are we agreed to revert ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , if we changed the original English version by putting " determine " in the place of " whether is , " I would respectfully submit that this would have to be reflected in the French version . 
if I understand correctly , if we add the words " determine current status as a member " to the English text , it means the status of the senator will have to be determined . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in the English text we removed " determine whether " and we have changed it to read " whatever . " 
is that agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders take into consideration the Senate debate of February 11 and its interim report related to its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 , particularly with respect to the amendment that was moved ; 
that the committee be authorized to obtain further advice of legal counsel in the matter of the power of the Senate to expel , suspend or otherwise deprive Senator Thompson of his seat in the Senate ; and the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity and expense allowance , whatever his current status as a member of the Senate ; and 
that the committee submit its recommendations thereon as soon as possible or , in any case , no later than when it presents its final report on February 24 , 1998 on its Order of Reference of December 16 , 1997 . 
i have called the motion . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 39 
Tuesday , February 17 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Honourable Finlay MacDonald 
tributes on Retirement 
distinguished Visitors in the Gallery 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the HONOURABLE M. LORNE BONNELL 
tribute on Retirement 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
the Senate 
apology for Remarks Accredited by Media as Opinion of Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
efficacy of Anthrax Vaccine Destined for Use on Military Personnel En Route to Persian Gulf - Request for Answer 
possible Strike by Western Nations - Bombing of Storage Facilities for Weapons of Mass Destruction - Provision of Protective Clothing for Military Personnel - Government Position 
possible Strike by Western Nations in Conformity with International Conventions of War - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
violence in Algeria - Mission of Members of Parliament - Lack of Senate Participation - Request for Particulars 
the Economy 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Possibility of Tax Cut - Government Position 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Request for Particulars of Studies Conducted 
delayed Answers To Oral Questions 
human Resources Development 
changes to Canada Pension Plan - Budget for Expenditure on Promotion and Advertising - Government Position 
purpose of Surplus in Employment Insurance Reserve Account - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
telecommunications Act 
canada Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
ninety - Eighth Inter - Parliamentary Conference , Cairo , Egypt - Inquiry 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Debate Continued 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
eighth Annual Meeting with Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League - Inquiry 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , February 17 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Honourable Finlay MacDonald 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , last November , a dinner was held at the Ch â teau Laurier to honour our recently retired colleague Finlay MacDonald . 
it was an evening that attracted some 200 people , of whom a dozen or so were asked to share their thoughts and appreciation or , as such events tend to encourage , their lack of appreciation of the guest of honour . 
three senators were among the numbers present that evening . 
i certainly hope that if the other two speak today , they will not find as inhibiting as I do this adjustment from the freedom allowed by the " off the record , let it all hang out " concept of that event to the " everything you say here will be recorded for posterity " caution imposed on senators ' tributes . 
this is not to say that Senator MacDonald ' s many activities in this place were ignored ; only that narrations of his activities elsewhere attracted more attention and interest , and with good reason , as it turns out . 
on the other hand , had the speakers on that evening elaborated on Finlay the senator , one evening would not have been enough to list all of his accomplishments during his 13 years here . 
Finlay never hid his ambition to be a senator . 
the Ottawa Citizen of March 28 , 1987 , contained an article which described the long road which brought Finlay to the Senate ; a road not at all smooth , by the way : 
Finlay MacDonald had worked for it as long as he would remember . 
he almost had it in the bag once , but it wasn ' t going to be . 
so he ' d waited - five years , three months and seventeen days . 
it had been a long road for Finlay MacDonald . 
provincial Party president , three elections , Chairman of Robert Stanfield ' s '72 campaign , Chief of Staff . 
he ' d been a senior adviser to Joe and Chairman of Brian ' s transition team . 
five and a half years in charge of the Party ' s war chest . 
he ' d built a PC Canada Fund from nothing , and now it was the envy of the Grits . 
he ' d left it with 65,000 donors , a mailing list to make you green . 
they had a computer there to make your head swim . 
he never got a dime for that work . 
honourable senators , lest this confirm that only party loyalty brings you here to this chamber , let me remind you of Finlay MacDonald ' s active participation in the broadcasting industry and his numerous community activities , including St. Francis Xavier University and the Shaw Festival . 
in 1969 , he was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada " in recognition of his efforts and those of some 2,000 volunteer members of the 1969 Canada Games Society , of which he was President , which ensured the success of the First Summer Games . " 
Finlay ' s passionate support as a member of the Progressive Conservative Party never stopped him from staking out a position of his own when he felt that the PC government was moving in the wrong direction . 
when sitting on the other side , I would not hide my annoyance at his not toeing the party line , although I have to admit that , when viewed from this side , such behaviour is most commendable and to be encouraged , as it is an example of democracy at its finest . 
honourable senators , I need not give you any kind of a list of the accomplishments that must be credited to the senator from Halifax who , in his 13 years here , was known and appreciated on both sides as a constant attendee and vigorous contributor to the work of the upper chamber . 
we must always be grateful for this candour , and for his determination in many of the matters we have addressed in recent years . 
senator MacDonald ' s work as chairman of the special committee which examined the cancellation of contracts at Pearson airport left this chamber with an example of arduous and long - term work manfully done and honestly reported . 
any doubts regarding the conclusions of the majority on that committee have been dispelled by no less an authority than Stephen D . Lerner of Winnipeg , whose specialty is aerospace law . 
the federal government erred when it cancelled the Pearson Airport Agreements . 
as much as this is vindication for the chairman and his colleagues on the committee , it should not take away from the wisdom of Finlay ' s reflections on his experiences during the Pearson inquiry , which can be found in the June 18 , 1996 Hansard . 
i commend them to all , as they are from one who , as well as being a diligent and conscientious participant in our deliberations , was an acute and thoughtful observer of the Senate and its role and responsibilities within the Canadian parliamentary system . 
while he will be greatly missed in this place , retirement from the Senate for Finlay is only another step in an active life that still has many years ahead of it . 
i have no doubt that we have not heard the last of or from him . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , at the dinner for Senator Finlay MacDonald , which was referred to by the Leader of the Opposition and held in Ottawa several weeks ago , the audience was indeed regaled with stories by a host of Tories and a small group of Liberals , including the likes of myself . 
i had the distinct honour of both eulogizing and vilifying my long - term fellow Cape Bretoner and friend before the largest group of Red Tories gathered together since the Diefenbaker train , fittingly enough , I thought , in the Laurier Room of the Ch â teau Laurier . 
early in life , we both became broadcasters - Finlay was much more successful than I - and we dabbled in politics . 
the 1958 federal election campaign became a watershed from which neither one of us ever turned back . 
a few days after the election , I went to Halifax to seek solace and comfort from my friends . 
that was 40 years ago . 
i was scuttled for the second time in a week by my friend - now sitting and smiling up in the gallery . 
i was crushed and mortally wounded , I thought at the time . 
however , what goes around , comes around . 
now you are up there , Fin , and I am still down here ! 
i guess we always had a lot in common . 
as Shaw once said about the credentials for budding politicians : 
a lot of people at the time might have thought that applied to us both . 
back to the retirement bash for Senator MacDonald . 
will I be perceived as a wolf in sheep ' s clothing , or the reverse ? 
maybe history will tell lies , as it often does , or maybe I will be seen as a kind of martyr . 
as a great man once said : " Yes , martyrdom ... the only way in which a man can become famous , without ability . " 
however , there we all were , applauding , lauding and laughing with the ageless charmer , the silver fox himself , and celebrating the career of one of the most entertaining people this town has ever known - also one of the hardest working senators on the Hill . 
he served on many committees , including Legal and Constitutional Affairs and Internal Economy . 
he was deputy chairman of Banking , Trade and Commerce and National Finance . 
when he was chairman of Transport and Communications , he and I did a lot of puffing and blowing over the then government ' s intention to privatize the Truro - to - Sydney rail line . 
we chugged along together , making our points , and sometimes , I suspect , mischievously trying to out - manoeuvre the other , always with what we each thought was the public good uppermost in our minds . 
Finlay worked hard and supported all good causes in Nova Scotia and many across the country , although on the issue of the shortline sale , I felt at the time that he was on the wrong side of history . 
no matter , he was always a man of independent mind and believed in what he did , and the devil take whoever tried to dissuade him from his convictions . 
not that he was not a team player . 
he was , most of the time , but he is one of the few people I have met who could vote against his own government , sail through the onslaught , and still be invited to the Prime Minister ' s soir é es . 
honourable senators , it seems to me that Senator MacDonald ' s spirit , determination and incorrigible optimism have made a lot of people happy over the years . 
as for his enemies ? 
well , he has picked them very carefully . 
Finlay , when I think of you , I think of one of the Tory greats of yesterday , Prime Minister John A . Macdonald , who may have been your match in personal charm and certainly cut the same kind of dapper and rakish figure . 
sir John A . once said : 
when fortune empties her chamber pot on your head , smile and say " We are going to have a summer shower . " 
senator MacDonald , may the chamber pots of life always turn into the soft and gentle rain of happiness . 
we certainly miss you down here . 
our warmest best wishes to you and Lynn in your retirement years . 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , I , too , was at the November dinner in honour of our friend , and I wish to pay tribute to him today . 
i have known Finlay for over 45 years and have worked with him one way or another on many events since 1953 . 
he was a provincial strategist for the Progressive Conservatives in Nova Scotia and was for a time president of the Nova Scotia PC Party . 
he served on the national executive of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada and was a candidate in a federal election in Halifax in 1963 . 
he chaired the Progressive Conservative national campaign in 1972 , chaired the PC Canada Fund , and was chief of staff to the Right Honourable Robert Stanfield and to the Right Honourable Joe Clark . 
in paying tribute to him today , I have decided to take the high road , to discuss his work , rather than putting on the public record his escapades which occurred while we shared a home together here in Ottawa for 11 years , except to say we had many laughs and interesting times . 
as we all know in this chamber , it has become commonplace in the media to criticize the method by which people become senators . 
for years we have been inundated with stories about the superiority of selection through popular election over the present appointment system . 
the framers of our Constitution must have had Senator MacDonald in mind when they established the type of Senate that we were to have . 
it was Sir John A . MacDonald who said : 
there would be no use of an Upper House if it did not exercise , when it thought proper , the right of opposing or amending or postponing the legislation of the Lower House . 
it would be no value whatever were it a mere chamber for registering the decrees of the Lower House . 
it must be an independent House having a freed action of its own , for it is only valuable as being a regulating body , calmly considering the legislation initiated by the popular branch , and preventing any hasty or ill - considered legislation which may come from that body . 
senator Finlay MacDonald , in what he has done in the 13 years he has been here , typifies the trusts which our constitutional framers placed in the Senate . 
the opportunity for Senator Finlay MacDonald to exercise this independence came quickly after his appointment . 
in his first month in the Senate , namely in January , 1985 , he opposed his own government ' s act to provide borrowing authority based only on Finance Minister Michael Wilson ' s economic statement the previous November . 
since no budget or Main Estimates had been presented at that time , the borrowing bill was held up for over a month until the Main Estimates were presented . 
over the following years , Finlay voted against his own government eight times . 
he opposed the bill that eliminated the Economic Council of Canada , the Law Reform Commission of Canada and the Science Council of Canada , and other bills too complicated to mention . 
in 1993 , he became ballistic in his fight against the bill which would have merged the Canada Council and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council . 
he proposed an amendment to kill the merger and , as Hugh Windsor wrote on June 3 , 1993 : 
he made legislative history . 
it was the first time any Conservative senator had attempted to change , improve , modify or defeat any piece of government legislation in the nine years since Mr. Mulroney took office . 
his amendment was defeated 31 to 27 . 
Undeterred , on third read he managed to convince four Conservative senators , including me , to join with him . 
he caught his own colleagues unaware by asking other Tory senators to abstain , and then by voting with the Liberals . 
the entire bill was defeated on a tie vote , 39 to 39 . 
it was the first time that the Senate had defeated a government bill since 1939 . 
as a matter of fact , every bill the Senate has defeated , namely , the abortion bill , the Pearson airport bill and the death of the gerrymandering Electoral Boundaries Act , has the fingerprints of Senator Finlay MacDonald all over it - and mine , too , I am proud to say . 
he led the charge in caucus and in the Senate to save Radio Canada International , our shortwave service , the voice of Canada . 
the index of Debates of the Senate records that since January , 1985 until the present time , he has spoken in the chamber 283 times , and God knows how many times he has spoken during the sittings of the nine committees on which he served , three of them as chairman ! 
i believe he would say the most interesting time he has spent in this place came during his tenure as chairman of the Special Senate Inquiry into the Pearson Airport Contracts . 
while others may have shrunk from this onerous task , Senator MacDonald not only volunteered but also actively campaigned for the job . 
while some in this chamber may have found fault with the majority opinion of that committee , Senator MacDonald steered the committee through the charted waters of summoning by subpoena government witnesses , and through thousands of pages of documents placed in evidence . 
above all , under his chairmanship , this committee of inquiry demonstrated the positive work that can be done by this chamber at a fraction of the cost of a royal commission . 
it has become popular in the press lately to criticize senators because of their attendance records - that is , records of their lack of attendance . 
let me set out the record of Finlay ' s attendance . 
senators are permitted to be absent without excuse for 21 days in each parliamentary session . 
the Clerk of the Senate , who keeps the attendance , has verified that during his entire 13 years in the Senate , Finlay missed only 25 days . 
that is less than two days a year . 
i believe , with Senator MacDonald in this chamber , that Canadians have been well served . 
in the years I have known Finlay , I have come to admire him and , in particular , his sense of humour , his boundless energy , his sense of fairness , his political instincts , and his enthusiasm when faced with a difficult challenge . 
this adds up to a senator who has had a great influence on my life , and one for whom I have great respect . 
i only hope that he will find new challenges to occupy his time . 
he has energy and enthusiasm , and he is not a person to remain idle . 
may he continue to serve his community and country for a long time to come . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I grew up on Inglewood Drive in Halifax . 
Mr. MacDonald lived on the next street . 
i was not allowed to call him Finlay in those days ; he had to be Mr. MacDonald , in the jargon of the era . 
he was a Conservative . 
that was the only misjudgment my father ever thought Finlay MacDonald had made . 
my father was a great admirer of what he thought was a genuine , self - made man who had given of his talent and his ability to others - both in the political process and to the many charitable organizations which have not been discussed here , but to which all Nova Scotians know that you have given during your many years of contributions to that province . 
among the admiring things that my father used to say about Finlay MacDonald , there was one in which there was just a tinge of jealousy . 
on a number of occasions , my father had been placed on the best dressed list for men in the country , but my father was only five foot five and a half inches tall . 
he was very jealous that Senator MacDonald was equally as dapper , but had more height to give more splendour to the clothes in which he was dressed . 
Finlay , you are held in great esteem by this chamber . 
i want you to know that you are also held in great esteem by my family , despite your political lack of sagacity . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I was conditioned to be suspicious of Conservatives . 
my father used to say , " Conservatives do not have hearts , they have wallets . " 
when I was five , instead of reading me bedtime stories , my mother would read the editorials of the Athens Liberal paper . 
soon , I said to myself , " Well , if someone like him can be a Conservative , maybe there are some decent Conservatives . " 
to my great surprise , I found out that , yes , indeed , there are some of you whom I like - not all of you , but I might even say most of my colleagues opposite . 
you have failed in one thing , which I will illustrate by relating what occurred when I was coming out through the Senate door with my very beautiful sister - in - law . 
i was kissing her on both cheeks , following our lunch together . 
in walks Finlay and he says , " Me , too . " 
he grabbed her around the waist , did a complete sort of tango flip , and gave her a very long kiss on the mouth . 
i said , " He is a Conservative senator . " 
she said , " I think I will vote Conservative next time . " 
hon. John Buchanan : 
honourable senators , I also would like to pay tribute to Finlay MacDonald . 
i know quite a few things about Finlay that I will not relate today . 
Finlay MacDonald : family man , fellow Cape Bretoner , war veteran , broadcaster , graduate of St. F - X University of Antigonish , politician extraordinaire , member of the Order of Canada and , as a dear friend of his mentioned to me this morning , and as I knew , the life of the party wherever a party was held . 
i think Finlay will know who related that to me . 
he is in Halifax and also a neighbour of his in Chester . 
as Senator Atkins mentioned , Finlay was president of the PC Party of Nova Scotia in the mid - 1960 s . 
he was a great president of the PC Party . 
that was about the time that I got involved in politics . 
in 1963 , Finlay ran in the federal election . 
although he lost , he won just about every poll in a constituency which two years later was called Halifax - Atlantic . 
i knocked on many doors with Finlay during that election . 
his debonair ways , his wit and his excellent campaigning ensured that he would win a majority of those polls . 
i was a member of the cabinet of Nova Scotia at the time and attended many of the functions . 
the talk of the neighbourhood where Finlay lived was that the Prime Minister of Canada , Pierre Elliott Trudeau , visited Finlay ' s home at the time . 
many of the people in that neighbourhood , both Liberals and Conservatives , were very pleased that the Prime Minister had taken the time to visit in that part of Halifax . 
the Canada Games were a huge success , due to the hard work of many , but primarily of Finlay MacDonald . 
all of this is primarily due to the efficiency and hard work of Finlay and the people who worked for him at IEL . 
here in the Senate , Finlay has been a very efficient and hard worker . 
as Senator Atkins has already indicated , he has been a faithful attender , chairman of many committees over the years , and has always defended the Senate of Canada . 
i have known Finlay for almost 40 years . 
i knew his family in Sydney . 
his father was a Conservative Member of Parliament from Cape Breton South for ten years . 
Finlay , congratulations to you on your good work over the years and on all of the endeavours I have mentioned in which you were involved . 
some of you might not know that Senator MacDonald ' s real name is not Finlay MacDonald . 
in Cape Breton and at St. F - X , to many of the young ladies of the day he was known as Ernie Finlay MacDonald . 
i bring you greetings , Finlay , from some ladies in the Boston area who told me to ensure that I address you as Ernie Finlay MacDonald . 
you will know who I mean . 
i should say that Senator Graham knows those ladies as well . 
i am getting in deep now . 
in closing , Finlay MacDonald is a credit to Cape Breton , a credit to Nova Scotia and a credit to Canada . 
well done , good and faithful servant of Cape Breton and Nova Scotia . 
do not take this wrong , but many were the nights , during annual meetings of the PC Party , that I would go up to the suite where there were a bunch of people and find Finlay and Mavis on the floor doing their exercises . 
that is why they were both in such good shape . 
i do mean " exercises " in the common sense . 
Finlay , Mavis and I extend our best wishes to you and Lynn as you return to Halifax . 
well done . 
senator Graham : 
i should like to indicate that when Senator Buchanan speaks of the ladies in Boston he is talking about his sister and relatives . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , in December of 1984 , I was doing my Christmas shopping on Sparks Street one very snowy and cold day when someone grabbed me by the arm , spun me around and said , " Hey , did you see that I appointed Finlay MacDonald to the Senate ? 
what do you think ? " 
it was Brian Mulroney . 
i looked at him sternly and said , " It ' s about time . " 
so it was . 
for a long time , Finlay MacDonald has understood and respected the system of government , knowing also that it was not infallible . 
he knew about the role of political parties in that system better than most , and he regarded politics always as an honourable occupation . 
he saw communications and culture as absolutely critical to national unity , and I strongly agreed with him all along the way . 
as a parliamentarian , he acted with diligence and , as many have said , with integrity and with humour . 
Finlay MacDonald has been a political opponent of mine for over 30 years , but also a personal friend . 
i hope he never stops adding to the contribution he has already made to his province and to his country . 
i wish him and Lynn many happy years together . 
distinguished Visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw the attention of the Senate to the presence in our gallery of our distinguished former colleague , Honourable Senator Finlay MacDonald . 
i note that Senator MacDonald is accompanied by another long - standing senator , Honourable Senator Lorne Bonnell . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before we proceed with Senators ' Statements , I should like to introduce to you the exchange pages who are with us from the House of Commons this week . 
on my right is Sue - Anne Fox , from Montreal . 
she is enrolled at the University of Ottawa in the faculty of administration , with a major in marketing . 
Maurice Turcot of Saint - Charles , Ontario , is pursuing his studies in criminology at the University of Ottawa . 
he is enrolled in the faculty of social sciences . 
i welcome both of you to the Senate and hope that you will find your week with us a productive one . 
the HONOURABLE M. LORNE BONNELL 
tribute on Retirement 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore : 
honourable senators , I rise today to make a statement in tribute to Senator M. Lorne Bonnell , who retired from this honourable chamber on January 4 , 1998 , upon the occasion of his 75 th birthday . 
senator Bonnell entered public life in 1951 when , while still carrying on a busy medical practice , he was elected to the House of Assembly of Prince Edward Island . 
he was re - elected in general elections held in 1955 , 1959 , 1962 , 1966 and 1970 . 
in addition to being an elected member , the good doctor also served his fellow Islanders as Minister of Health , Minister of Welfare , Minister of Tourism and Development , Minister Responsible for Housing , and Liberal house leader . 
in 1965 , he served as acting leader of the Liberal Party of Prince Edward Island . 
he knew how to get elected and stay elected . 
on November 15 , 1971 , Dr. Bonnell was appointed to the Senate of Canada by the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau . 
no doubt because of his medical training and experience , Senator Bonnell exhibited a strong interest and deep concern for the youth of our country , their health and education . 
among the highlights of Senator Bonnell ' s distinguished career in the Senate must be his chairmanship of the Standing Senate Committee on Health , Welfare and Science , which produced a report in 1980 entitled " Child at Risk . 
" that report and its contents are as much in vogue and as relevant today as they were 18 years ago . 
of equal importance was his chairmanship of the Special Committee on Post - Secondary Education which , in December 1997 , produced a report that will be an important blueprint respecting the education of our youth and how we approach this very important issue in the years ahead . 
senator Bonnell ' s office in Room 265 - E was a gathering spot for many senators from both sides of the house . 
there you would be treated to good conversation , lively stories and warm fellowship . 
the good doctor was quick to dispense medications or libations depending upon your need or request . 
after such sessions you revelled in frequenting the Caf é de la Promenade for a meal of Chinese food chased with a beer . 
on a personal note , when I came to this place in the fall of 1996 , Senator Bonnell took me under his wing . 
he showed me around . 
he explained the operations and traditions of this honourable chamber , the functioning of its officers and the interests of the personalities seated herein . 
we two Maritimers quickly became good friends . 
i shall always be grateful for the interest that he took in me and the many courtesies he extended to me . 
a devout family man of consummate energy , Senator Bonnell has returned to his beloved Murray River where he attends to his patients in his medical practice and oversees his various business interests . 
with 20 years in the House of Assembly in Prince Edward Island , 27 years in the Senate of Canada , Senator Bonnell has provided a total of 47 years of service to his fellow Islanders and Canadians , a distinguished record that required commitment , integrity and energy . 
senator Bonnell has done his island and Canada proud . 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
the Senate 
apology for Remarks Accredited by Media as Opinion of Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee 
hon. Phillippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I wish to apologize to the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs on which I have the honour to serve . 
in answer to a citizen ' s letter urging me to support Bill C - 220 , which would take away the copyright of people found guilty of some offences , I said that I thought the committee considered the bill unconstitutional and badly drafted . 
i did not have the right to speak on behalf of the committee . 
i should have said that this was my opinion alone that this bill is unconstitutional , badly drafted and does not do anything for victims ' rights . 
please forgive me . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
efficacy of Anthrax Vaccine Destined for Use on Military Personnel En Route to Persian Gulf - Request for Answer 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I address my question to the Leader of the Government . 
as he is aware , I asked a question last week concerning the inoculation of our troops with the anthrax vaccine for their work in the Persian Gulf . 
in that information I gave him , was indicated that it would take six weeks for the vaccine to have an effect or take hold , which might be too late should all heck break loose over there . 
does the honourable senator have a response as yet in regard to this question ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have consulted with my colleagues . 
as late as this morning , I discussed this issue with the Minister of National Defence . 
i have been assured that he has been assured by the medical doctors in the armed forces that indeed our armed forces personnel will be safe and that immediately upon the inoculation being given , it begins to take effect . 
my understanding is that at the time that our armed forces might be in any danger areas , they would be fully and adequately protected . 
senator Stratton : 
senator Graham : 
i am sure one would receive many varying opinions from medical experts depending upon their particular field of expertise . 
however , I have been informed by the Minister of National Defence that he has the full assurance of medical authorities in the armed forces that the vaccine would take effect in sufficient time so that our Canadian Armed Forces personnel would be fully protected . 
possible Strike by Western Nations - Bombing of Storage Facilities for Weapons of Mass Destruction - Provision of Protective Clothing for Military Personnel - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , can the Leader of the Government in the Senate also assure us that any member of the service who is assigned to the Persian Gulf will be outfitted with the most up - to - date equipment so that he or she is protected from any possible circumstances that might arise there ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is an appropriate and very timely question . 
our ships were designed with this kind of threat in mind , and our personnel have been equipped with protective clothing that enables them to carry out their duties safely , should any of the weapons that have been talked about be used . 
assurance of Protection for Civilians - 
government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
what about protection for the innocent civilians on the ground in Iraq , should the bombing that has been spoken of be undertaken , and in particular , bombing of the sites where the biological and chemical materials are stored ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure the Honourable Senator Kinsella appreciates that every humanitarian effort will be taken to ensure that all possible human lives are safeguarded . 
possible Strike by Western Nations in Conformity with International Conventions of War - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the answer to that question is a very definite " yes . " 
foreign Affairs 
violence in Algeria - Mission of Members of Parliament - Lack of Senate Participation - Request for Particulars 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , my question is for the government leader in the Senate . 
i apologize for not giving him advance notice of this question as perhaps I should have done . 
he will recall that , before Christmas , I raised in this house the matter of the killing of innocent people in Algeria . 
during Ramadan , over 1,000 people - most of them women and children , but also men - were atrociously murdered for reasons difficult to accept in terms of human rights . 
recently , we have heard that the Honourable Don Boudria has been trying to organize a visit to Algeria by members of the House of Commons - for what purpose , I do not know ; and with what instructions from the Minister of Foreign Affairs for the government , I do not know . 
i think that sort of information would be useful to all members of Parliament . 
in addition , would the Leader of the Government inquire why members of the Senate have not been invited to form part of that mission , if there is , indeed , to be a mission ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
canada is actively involved in looking for the best way to help the victims of violence in Algeria . 
an envoy has already been dispatched to Algeria . 
the results of the visit , I understand , were positive and enabled Canadian representatives to have a frank and open dialogue with the Algerian authorities . 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs has written to the president of the country , and has received a response which I understand was encouraging , and leads Canada to believe that further Canadian initiatives will be welcomed in that part of the world . 
as was indicated , there is hope that the government house leader , Mr. Boudria , will soon be able to go to the area . 
i will determine very shortly whether or not members of this chamber could be part of the delegation , or at least , as a start , determine what the make - up of that delegation will be . 
the Economy 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Possibility of Tax Cut - Government Position 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , the income gap between Canadians and our American neighbours continues to widen , not only because of the drop in the value of our dollar but because incomes are rising faster in the United States than in Canada . 
in the third quarter of 1997 , after - tax income per man , woman and child in the United States was just a bit more than $ 30,000 in Canadian funds . 
put another way , after income taxes , per capita personal income in the United States is now 75 per cent above Canadian levels . 
would the government leader not agree that the time has come to bring down income taxes so that this gap can be narrowed ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I cannot prejudge or pre - empt what the Minister of Finance will do in his budget . 
i can only suggest that we wait . 
perhaps that is the only answer I have , except to indicate , as I did the other day in response to Senator Jessiman , that that is the pattern that has existed for a long time . 
there is an income gap between citizens of the United States and Canada . 
however , there are many good news economic indicators in our country which bode well for the future . 
whether you want to talk about manufacturing shipments growing by 2 per cent in December , new motor vehicle sales posting their strongest monthly gain of the year , up 14.6 per cent , and so on , all the economic indicators are positive . 
i would hope that in that process , as we approach and achieve the objective of a zero deficit , the income gap will narrow . 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Request for Particulars of Studies Conducted 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question on the same topic . 
this gap has been widening for a number of years . 
it is of particular concern to Canadians now because it is becoming abundantly clear that we are falling further and further behind as our Canadian dollar has been dropping like a stone . 
has the government done any kind of research to determine the reasons - there cannot be just one reason - behind this ever - widening gap ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
yes , honourable senators , I shall attempt to provide a more detailed answer for Senator Stratton , as well as for Senator Jessiman . 
delayed Answers To Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
human Resources Development 
changes to Canada Pension Plan - Budget for Expenditure on Promotion and Advertising - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Terry Stratton on October 30 , 1997 ) 
projected costs of the 1 - 800 line is approximately $ 250,000 for the period September 27 , 1997 ( tabling of Bill C - 2 ) to February 14 , 1998 . During the period September 27 , 1997 to January 25 , 1998 , some 32,600 calls were answered . 
purpose of Surplus in Employment Insurance Reserve Account - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Terry Stratton on November 26 , 1997 ) 
during the last recession , the EI account began to run a large deficit . 
every year since 1994 EI premiums have been reduced . 
EI premiums were reduced again for 1998 , with premiums declining from $ 2.90 to $ 2.70 . 
while EI premiums will be reduced again , the government will not lower premiums such that they have to be raised again in the event of a recession . 
during the last recession , premiums had to be increased to maintain the financial integrity of the EI account . 
clearly , this was not good policy because increasing EI premiums during a recession exacerbates job losses for Canadians . 
orders OF THE DAY 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Gigant è s , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier , for the second reading of Bill C - 18 , to amend the Customs Act and the Criminal Code . 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , on Bill C - 18 , I will be responding to the remarks made at second reading by the government side , but it will not be today since I have a little more research to do on the question . 
i therefore adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , debate adjourned . 
telecommunications Act 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I am pleased to speak today on behalf of Bill C - 17 , which clears the way for Canada to implement the World Trade Organization agreement on basic telecommunications . 
bill C - 17 will amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , thus paving the way for the implementation of this WTO agreement on basic telecommunications . 
a rigorous consultation process took place between the government , industry and the provinces before the agreement was negotiated , and there has been valuable input from numerous witnesses into the final shape of the bill that is now before us . 
this agreement , which is contained in the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services , or GATS as it is more commonly known , will benefit Canada and the world . 
it will not only dramatically expand the global market in telecommunication services , it will also open a multi - billion dollar global market to Canadian telecommunications companies . 
these markets include the United States , the European Union , Japan , and the developing markets in Asia and Latin America . 
colleagues , this bill contains the legislative amendments necessary to meet our GATS commitments , along with several provisions related to the liberalization of the Canadian international telecommunications market . 
they are the amendments to the Telecommunications Act to exempt international submarine cables and earth stations from the foreign ownership and control restrictions . 
honourable senators , the main purpose of this bill and the agreement it helps implement is to expand , stimulate and liberalize international trade and level the playing field . 
the purpose of Bill C - 17 and the agreement is to open up world markets to Canadian businesses so that they are on a level playing field with their competitors and can thus prosper and create even more jobs for Canadians . 
their purpose is to expand the world telecommunications market so that the telecommunications services available to Canadians continue to grow and improve in quality . 
honourable senators , we know that Canada is a trading country and that international trade contributes strongly to economic growth and job creation . 
we exported goods worth $ 264.2 billion last year compared to $ 148.9 billion in 1990 . 
the importance of foreign trade in goods and services in Canada ' s economic production ranks it first among the G - 7 countries . 
in 1995 , our goods and services exports accounted for over 40 per cent of our gross domestic product . 
it is obvious that foreign trade is what drives our economy . 
we must focus on foreign trade if we are to create the jobs this country needs . 
this is why trade expansion is essential to the federal job creation strategy , a partnership involving the federal , provincial and municipal governments , the private sector and the NGOs . 
one Canadian job in three depends on exports . 
for every additional billion dollars in exports , honourable senators , 11,000 jobs are created or maintained . 
by contributing to the liberalization of international trade , this bill stimulates economic growth and the creation of quality jobs in Canada . 
the telecommunications sector is of particular significance for the economic development of Canada . 
our success in the new knowledge - based economy requires a competitive and dynamic telecommunications industry . 
this vital sector already accounts for 145,000 jobs and 3.4 per cent of our gross domestic product . 
if we encourage the growth of the industry , we will be in a position to compete with the best in the world ; otherwise , we are going to condemn our country and our children to second - class status , sitting back to watch our international competitors take advantage of our missed opportunities . 
i want to take this opportunity to address them . 
canada and 69 other participating countries have made specific commitments under the agreement setting out the terms and conditions by which foreign companies may supply basic telecommunication services in their markets . 
for example , the agreement gives Canadian companies full access to the U.S. market in basic telecommunication services . 
the use of reciprocity tests by the U.S. federal communications commission will be severely curtailed . 
furthermore , Canadian companies will be able to enter other telecommunications markets , such as in the European Union and Japan . 
all of our major developing - country trading partners have agreed to allow foreign competition into their markets as well as foreign investment . 
besides opening their markets , participating countries have also committed to follow the GATS most - favoured - nation treatment and transparency provisions . 
an important part of the agreement is that all participating countries must establish independent , regulatory bodies that are separate from , and not accountable to , the local telephone company . 
in Canada , we already have such a body in the CRTC , which as a model regulatory body is recognized around the world both for its independence and its transparent and open process . 
as a result of this agreement , which includes a dispute settlement provision , we will have multilateral rules for trade and investment on basic telecommunications services . 
it is important to remember that besides benefitting Canada this agreement is good for the world economy . 
that , too , benefits Canada . 
manufacturers will also benefit from the Information Technology Agreement which will eliminate tariffs on information technology products , including computers , semiconductors , and telecommunications equipment , by the year 2000 . 
together , the GATS on basic telecommunications and the Information Technology Agreement , both of which are administered by the WTO , provide a springboard for global economic growth and development . 
the result will be lower prices for consumers and fewer barriers to the spread of technology which is critical to the development of all countries . 
the two agreements cover international business worth over U.S. $ 1 trillion , which is roughly equivalent to the world ' s trade in agriculture , automobiles and textiles combined . 
these will generate increased demand for Canadian telecommunications products as telecom operators around the world gear up for a new global environment of open markets and competition . 
the GATS on basic telecommunications is expected to double or triple the international market for telecommunications over the next decade . 
leading Canadian telecom manufacturers , such as Nortel and Newbridge , as well as many other small - and medium - sized companies across the country , will be free to compete in this dynamic and expanding market . 
the government promised to create jobs for Canadians and to plug Canada into the global knowledge economy . 
these agreements will do just that . 
the GATS will create the same kind of positive conditions for services in trade that the GATT has done for goods and trade . 
the GATT has contributed to a tenfold increase in the volume of world trade in goods since 1947 . 
honourable senators , this is a good agreement for Canada . 
our telecommunications companies are among the best in the world , and they are ready to take advantage of the new international business opportunities that this agreement will create . 
i urge you to act on this bill with all due speed . 
on motion of Senator Kelly , debate adjourned . 
canada Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to my motion for second reading of Bill S - 11 to amend section 3.1 of the Canadian Human Rights Act to include " social condition " as a prohibited ground of discrimination . 
as you know , there are groups of people in our society who are considered vulnerable and in need of special protection from discrimination . 
these groups are listed in the Canadian Human Rights Act . 
this bill simply proposes that we add " social condition " to that list in section 2 , subsection 3 . ( 1 ) and subsection 16 . ( 1 ) . 
promoting a society in which all human beings are equally entitled to be treated with respect , dignity and fairness has been an objective of the Canadian government for more than half a century . 
as you may well remember , I first tabled this bill on December 10 of last year , a date which marked the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
these past 50 years have presented us with many challenges , but as we struggle to achieve our ideals , we are motivated by the fact that we are improving the quality of life for all Canadians . 
however , to quote the 1997 report of the Canadian Human Rights Commission : 
canada ' s record as a committed proponent of human rights is only as convincing as its latest performance . 
if a shared belief in the value of equal treatment for all is a measure of our interdependence as citizens , then it is necessary to ask how well the experience of each and every Canadian bears out that belief each and every day . 
it is with regret that I report to you that poverty continues to be one of the greatest barriers to equality in Canadian society . 
poor Canadians live daily with social stigma and negative stereotypes . 
financial institutions , landlords , utility companies , the legal system , public and private media and our governments continue to discriminate against our most vulnerable citizens . 
what I am asking you to do today is to look at poverty through a human rights lens , because it is obvious to me that poverty is , first and foremost , a human rights issue . 
the pervasive social attitude toward the poor has proven to be , time and time again , discriminatory . 
yet more than two decades after signing the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , Canada has failed to amend its own domestic human rights law with respect to poverty . 
honourable senators , the reason we have a federal human rights law is to provide vulnerable groups with protection against discrimination in areas of federal jurisdiction . 
we in this chamber have been presented ample evidence which shows that the poorest 20 per cent of our population experience life differently than the majority of Canadians ; that our constituents who live in poverty have been excluded from the enjoyment of any meaningful participation in society ' s social , economic or cultural life . 
it is my assertion today that the poor in this country face a prejudice similar to the prejudice faced by the other marginalized groups who are listed within the Human Rights Act . 
despite this , there is no direct , legal recognition of poverty as a pervasive source of inequality and disadvantage in Canadian society . 
honourable senators , I am aware that the Canadian Human Rights Commission warns us that the Government of Canada is not able to hand out freedom and equality to Canadians or deliver them from prejudice and discrimination . 
however , I am also aware that they urge us to work towards the formulation of a coherent , purposeful body of law . 
in fact , they believe that the Canadian people have every right to expect that our government , in addition to vigorously enforcing existing laws , will act to strengthen and clarify existing human rights legislation . 
at this point in time , our human rights law is neither clear nor coherent , for we propose to promote equity for all Canadians ; then , by virtue of extending protection to some vulnerable groups and not others , we perpetuate the very kind of discrimination we seek to eliminate . 
in fact , the likely reason that poverty or " social condition " is not located as a prohibited ground within the act is that the poor are so very marginalized , both socially and economically that they lack the political power needed to achieve any influence within our political system . 
let us take it upon ourselves , honourable senators , to rectify this situation . 
first , I should like to present my argument as to why this is an appropriate undertaking for the executive branch of government . 
i first learned of this form of discrimination while working on my report , " Sounding the Alarm : 
poverty in Canada . " 
many of us in this chamber have always lived comfortably . 
many of us can also remember when poverty did not carry with it quite the social stigma that it has today . 
while researching the report , I heard in many cases of how the poor are viewed as though they are worthless simply because they live in poverty . 
they are often treated as second - class citizens . 
in time , many internalize these experiences , and begin to feel great shame and low self - esteem . 
upon learning this , I felt so strongly about these injustices that as one of the four recommendations made in the report , I asked that the federal government take the necessary steps to extend basic human rights protection to those living in poverty by including " social condition " as a prohibited ground of discrimination . 
well , honourable senators , one year has passed , proving the old adage that if you want something done , you had better do it yourself ! 
honourable senators , I am asking you to help our government to correct the omission of " social condition " in our Human Rights Act and , by doing so , improve the lives of those who live in poverty . 
this chamber has a proud tradition of raising the concerns of our less fortunate citizens . 
it took two years of travelling from coast to coast and listening to the poor before the 1971 report of the Special Senate Committee on Poverty was tabled . 
in the past , we have also improved our national human rights standards by adding previously excluded groups who could illustrate that they met the definition of needing special consideration in our society . 
one fine example is our work in relation to Bill S - 2 , to amend the Human Rights Act to include sexual orientation . 
honourable colleagues , it is completely within our role and mandate within the Canadian parliamentary system to embark on these types of challenges . 
in fact , I believe that we in the Senate have a duty to maintain the law , and to act to change it when the opportunity presents itself . 
it is also important that this bill be introduced in the Senate rather than in the other place . 
human rights legislation is , of course , about granting rights to the marginalized and maligned of our society . 
the fact that a group is in need of protection illustrates that they probably do not enjoy widespread support 
by definition , pioneering human rights legislation is inevitably a struggle against popular opinion . 
the poor are so disenfranchised that their issues are not of great concern to most elected officials . 
in fact , with the current trend in " poor bashing , " few politicians who seek re - election will risk political necks to convince a hardened public of the current plight of the poor . 
considering these factors , it is very unlikely that our colleagues in the other place would be able to initiate a similar bill . 
we have the luxury of being somewhat protected against political pressures , given our security of tenure , as we review and amend federal bills . 
hoping I have convinced you of the need for the Senate to initiate this bill , I will now move on to explain why I think that this work is timely . 
frustrated with the lack of legislative initiatives in the area of human rights law , activists have begun to use the judicial system to bring about change . 
in essence , they are able to argue that marginalized groups who are not listed within the charter but who experience similar types of discrimination must be considered analogous to the listed groups , and be treated as such by the law . 
noting their success , other equality - seeking groups are starting to follow suit . 
we were told during the public hearings on Bill S - 5 that anti - poverty groups will soon begin this process . 
it is currently law that analogous groups be treated the same as the listed groups with respect to the Charter . 
their only requirement is to prove to the court that they do , in fact , experience similar discrimination . 
given the testimony I heard , this will not be a difficult argument to make . 
our provinces have also moved several steps forward with regard to social condition as a prohibited ground for discrimination . 
according to The Law of Human Rights in Canada , by Russel Zinn and Patricia Brethour : 
seven provinces prohibit discrimination on the basis of either " social condition , " " social origin , " " source of income , " or " receipt of public assistance . " 
the ground of discrimination applies to all activities covered by the respective legislation , save and except Ontario , in which the prohibition applies solely with respect to the occupancy of accommodation . 
it is customary to keep the bodies of law which govern this country in synchronicity , and we should strive to keep abreast of our provincial legislation . 
i also bring to your attention , honourable senators , the current climate in the field of human rights in our nation . 
the Chief Commissioner of Human Rights , Michelle Falardeau - Ramsay , in her first public address , stated that she wants to use her position to help combat discrimination against Canada ' s poor by fighting to have " social condition " included as a prohibited ground . 
in short , amending the Canadian Human Rights Act to include " social condition " as a prohibited ground of discrimination will meet Parliament ' s responsibility to respect the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
this amendment will save poor people the hardship , and taxpayers the expense of litigation to bring the act into compliance with the Constitution and Canada ' s international human rights commitment . 
at this time , I think it is necessary to make completely clear what it is that we are actually asking for with this amendment . 
bill S - 11 does not confer any special privileges to Canada ' s poor . 
it deals solely with the proscription of discrimination , that is , prohibiting a burden . 
to spell this out even further , I am not proposing that the government make poverty itself a violation to our domestic human rights legislation . 
although , our complacent attitude about poverty does contradict what we have signed in international fora , I am not suggesting that our domestic human rights legislation be empowered to take our government to task for not providing an adequate standard of living for all of its citizens . 
all I am asking is that the poor , whether elderly or disabled , working or in receipt of social assistance , man or woman , not be prejudged and discriminated against . 
including " social condition " under the Canadian Human Rights Act would provide explicit recognition of poverty and its related attributes , such as receipt of social assistance , and would prohibit discrimination against the poor within the federal sphere . 
i am also here today in defence of our international reputation . 
as you know , Canada has generally endorsed the principles enshrined in the international covenants . 
however , you may not know that when we sign an international covenant , we also agree to a process of review . 
this is the way the United Nations monitors our compliance . 
at this time , we are being reviewed to ensure that our government ' s actions are in keeping with the International Covenant on Social , Economic , and Cultural Rights . 
honourable senators , I regret to inform you that we , as a government , are not faring well in this process . 
in the report of the last review , the United Nations asked that we take some steps to have our domestic human rights legislation more fully reflect that to which we have signed in international fora . 
however , although it has been almost a quarter of a century since signing the Covenant , we have failed to amend our Human Rights Act to include these basic rights for our most vulnerable citizens . 
however , by extending basic human rights protection , we are keeping our promise to continually improve the lives of Canada ' s poor . 
honourable senators , extending human rights legislation does more than simply uphold an ideal . 
in fact , by promoting human dignity , justice , fairness and equal opportunity , human rights protection could be one of our most powerful anti - poverty tools . 
this is true for several reasons . 
first , human rights law is a powerful educational tool . 
by setting standards , we help to create societal behaviours . 
it also starts a dialogue , so that people and institutions might come to understand more about the lives of those living in poverty . 
i have a wonderful example of how poverty education changed the views of an institution and , in turn , the lives of the poor . 
after years of hard work by the National Anti - Poverty Organization and l ' Association coop é rative d 'é conomie familiale du Centre de Montr é al , the Canadian Bankers Association came to a better understanding of the banking needs of low - income clients . 
they began to recognize how their institution discriminates against the poor . 
as a result , they have made a positive commitment to change several banking policies to better accommodate poor Canadians . 
she and her husband own a small home and pay a modest mortgage . 
one day , her husband lost his job . 
after weeks of searching , to no avail , and after draining all other resources , this family was forced on to social assistance . 
the social worker determined that their monthly mortgage was far less than what they would pay in the private market for an apartment . 
there is also a two - year waiting list for public housing . 
she determined that the most efficient , practical solution was to allow this family to continue with their mortgage . 
several weeks later , the father found a part - time job . 
while he was looking for full - time work , the family received a " top - up " benefit from social services and their mortgage continued to be paid . 
several months passed and the time came to renew their mortgage . 
much to their astonishment , the application to renew was denied . 
no consideration was given to the fact that they , through thick and thin , had , without fail , managed to meet their monthly mortgage payment . 
in fact , honourable senators , no consideration was given to their personal circumstances at all . 
the children lost their bedrooms and their backyard . 
the equity they had built up in their house just covered the selling costs . 
they had to move to an urban centre to find accommodation , so the children had to change schools . 
the father spends almost what he makes commuting to work . 
this , honourable senators , is a Canadian tragedy . 
housing advocates tell us that it is a tragedy which occurs daily from coast to coast . 
this type of treatment could be prevented simply by no longer allowing banks to discriminate against social assistance recipients . 
some may feel uncomfortable with the idea of setting further regulations on private enterprise , but you must consider that 96 per cent of housing in Canada is provided by the private sector and therefore requires some regulation if we want to achieve safe , affordable housing for our citizens . 
provinces have realized this and have decided that they must take action in the areas which fall under their jurisdiction . 
to help ensure equity in housing , they have begun to regulate how the private market , or landlords , allocate units . 
take for instance the family who lives in a major urban centre and cannot find housing because landlords do not want to rent to welfare recipients . 
the entire welfare cheque is used to cover housing cost and the family is forced to line up every day at soup kitchens and food banks . 
honourable senators , while a family is suffering this kind of misery , it is impossible for the parents to have the time and resources necessary to look for employment . 
front - line workers in social services tell us that there are many families who cannot obtain stable housing because they are discriminated against as social assistance recipients . 
they tell us that some families live in hotels for months , paying $ 300 to $ 400 per month more than what they would pay for an adequate apartment . 
this is the kind of discrimination the provinces are working against . 
if we work together , we can improve the lives of poor Canadians by making housing more affordable and more available . 
yes , honourable senators , this is a powerful anti - poverty strategy . 
customers who score well on income and credit tests are supplied immediate and courteous service . 
for those without employment income , the situation is much different . 
cases are piling up where people have moved to new accommodation and cannot get hydro or phone services activated if they are unemployed . 
as unimaginable as this may sound , hundreds of Canadians are currently at risk of being denied the essential services of phone , hydro , gas and oil , simply because they are poor . 
phone service , or telecommunications , is the one utility which falls under federal jurisdiction . 
this leaves many people without a telephone , a circumstance that makes looking for work very difficult . 
honourable senators , the General Assembly of the United Nations created a guideline of actions for governments to follow with respect to the International Decade for the Eradication of Poverty . 
one direction was : 
... to formulate or strengthen national policies geared to substantially reducing the inequality experienced by low income citizens . 
i believe that I have shown how this amendment will help to achieve precisely that goal . 
at the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen , the Canadian government declared : 
... the new economy has created the human deficit of unemployment and poverty . 
as part of this government , honourable senators , we must take notice of the changes around us and help rectify the situation . 
we need to determine what direction our nation will take as we enter the new millennium . 
for , as we struggle to balance the competing interests inherent in this new global economy , social instability seems to be the necessary trade - off for continued financial security . 
as we attempt to make our way through these massive alterations , untouched and unchanged , the needs of the financially vulnerable are increasingly ignored . 
the United Nations Human Development Program , or UNDP , has noted that this is the situation faced by most industrialized nations . 
they have predicted that , in the long term , our resistance to change will produce disastrous results . 
the 1997 UNDP report strongly urges us to empower the poor as part of the strategy for empowering our nation . 
i ask you today to take this advice and heed their warnings . 
if there is one thing that keeps me awake at night , it is wondering what our nation will look like , how our children and grandchildren will live a generation from now , after the prolonged social exclusion of 20 per cent of our population . 
the current reality is that some groups which have been recognized historically as being particularly vulnerable to discrimination have protection , while others do not . 
let us work together , honourable senators , to stop the discrimination perpetuated against our most vulnerable citizens . 
i urge you to help our government build a society in which there will be a place for all citizens , regardless of their race , national or ethnic origin , colour , religion , age , sex , sexual orientation , marital status , family status , social condition , disability or conviction for an offence for which a pardon has been granted . 
as senators , we must strive to constantly improve the lives of all Canadians , and we must never hesitate to strive for the moon . 
for even if we miss , we will find ourselves among the stars . 
on motion of Senator Chalifoux , debate adjourned . 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
ninety - Eighth Inter - Parliamentary Conference , Cairo , Egypt - Inquiry 
hon. G é rald J . Comeau rose pursuant to notice of Thursday , December 4 , 1997 : 
this was the first time the Union held its conference in the Middle East . 
we did a lot of research on the political situation in that part of the world . 
it was therefore entirely appropriate for him to say his farewells at a conference held in his own country . 
traditionally , Egypt has played a leading role in the Middle East and has been a cornerstone of regional stability . 
Egypt was the first state to sign a peace treaty with Israel , and maintaining a pivotal role in facilitating the Middle East peace process remains a key Egyptian foreign policy objective . 
both Egyptian President Mubarak and Foreign Minister Arnr Moussa continue to be active in attempts to bring Israel and PLO officials back to the negotiating tables . 
shortly after the conference , we heard many reports about the massacre of tourists in the temple in Luxor , and the problems with extremists . 
throughout our stay , we were very much aware of the high level of security in this country , especially at a conference such as ours where the president and top - ranking officials attended various events . 
in order to maintain its authority , the Mubarak government , with the support of the army , applies a variety of security measures , some of which restrict freedom . 
the security forces ' crackdowns on Islamic militants involve violations of rights and freedoms . 
over the past four years , the Egyptian authorities have continually punished violence by militants . 
including the 50 tourists recently assassinated at Luxor , terrorists have killed nearly 120 people this year , compared to 160 last year and 360 in 1995 . 
some 20,000 guerrilla fighters are being held in prison . 
parliamentary elections in late 1995 saw an estimated 45 per cent of the 21 million eligible Egyptian voters cast ballots . 
nearly 4,000 candidates competed for the 444 seats in the Egyptian People ' s Assembly , including hundreds from opposition parties who had boycotted elections in 1990 . 
i should like to turn now to the conference itself and the work of the Canadian delegation . 
the two main subjects of the agenda were : ensuring lasting democracy by forging close links between Parliament and the people , and employment in a globalizing world . 
i am pleased to report that Mr. Hubbard of the Canadian IPU group was a member of the drafting committee that prepared a resolution for presentation to the final plenary , and he was also elected to the role of rapporteur . 
this was Mr. Hubbard ' s first visit to an IPU conference , and he performed quite a task for a new member . 
during the general debate of the political , economic and social situation in the world , I spoke about the Canada - United States dispute over Pacific salmon and the need to find a reasonable solution to this issue . 
as I said earlier , Mr. Sorour of Egypt concluded his term as Chairman of the Inter - Parliamentary Union at the conference . 
so much of the time in Cairo was spent on choosing his replacement . 
the election was a particularly important one , because the next chairman will have to set the tone for the Union as it faces the challenges of the 21 st century . 
he will also have to work with the new secretary general , who will be appointed on the retirement of the current one , Mr. Pierre Cornillon , on June 30 , 1998 . 
there were three candidates for the presidency : 
Mr. Miguel Angel Martinez of Spain , former president of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe ; Mr. Eduardo Menem of Argentina , President of the Argentine Senate ; and Mr. Sangma of India , Speaker of their Lower House . 
happily , I can report that the candidate supported by the Twelve - Plus Group , Mr. Martinez , won by 127 votes to 88 during the second round of voting . 
Mr. Martinez , who has been active in the IPU since the early 1980 s , has a wealth of experience in the union and in other international fora . 
the work done in the plenary sessions and committee meetings is , of course , extremely important and useful . 
i would , however , like to say a few words about the other activities that took place during the Cairo conference . 
in my view , they are eloquent testimony to the effective role played by parliamentary delegations . 
recently we celebrated the success of Canada in bringing together 121 countries to sign the treaty on a global ban on antipersonnel mines . 
this event was the culmination of efforts by a wide variety of players : foreign ministers , officials , diplomats , grass - roots organizations , and parliamentarians . 
the Canadian IPU group is proud of its work in promoting and encouraging a global ban on antipersonnel mines , including the successful introduction of a debate and resolution on the subject at the Beijing IPU conference in September of 1996 . 
on a personal note , I might add that one of our colleagues , Senator Bosa , has been very forceful on this issue over the years . 
as you are aware , three major international players - China , Russia and the United States - did not sign the mines treaty . 
however , there have been many efforts to encourage these countries to join the Ottawa Process on land mines . 
in Cairo , the Canadian IPU group organized a meeting with the leader of the Chinese delegation to invite China to be a supporter of this international convention . 
although we were not successful in convincing China to sign the treaty , we believe that our work is part of a larger effort to convince Chinese authorities to change their views . 
the second initiative I would like to mention concerns our work with the Asia - Pacific group , one of the Union ' s five geopolitical groups . 
at the present time , Canada belongs to the 12 - plus group , which is made up of the European countries , Canada , the United States , Australia and New Zealand . 
Australia and New Zealand , however , are members both of the 12 - plus group and of the Asia - Pacific group . 
given the importance of our involvement in the Asia - Pacific region and our links with this part of the world for over a century , it seemed appropriate that we should ask to become a member of this group . 
while we were in Cairo , therefore , two members of our delegation explained to the Asia - Pacific group the reasons behind our request , emphasizing Canada ' s various links with this region and , in particular , the fact that it had hosted the last APEC conference in Vancouver . 
another area where members of the Canadian delegation played a vital role was in the promotion of Canada for a non - permanent seat on the Security Council for the term 1999 to 2000 . 
the election will take place in November , 1998 . Members of our delegation met with representatives of selected countries , noting that Canada had made a considerable , constructive and sustained contribution to the United Nations . 
we also underlined that Canada has taken a leading role in promoting effective UN renewal with a view of strengthening the UN ' s capability to serve the interests of the entire membership . 
we noted that Canada is the eighth largest contributor to the UN budget and pays its assessments in full and on time without conditions . 
Egypt has been eligible for development assistance from Canada since 1976 . 
it has for many years now been one of the main beneficiaries of Canadian assistance . 
not long ago , CIDA helped launch a number of projects designed to support the reforms that will enable Egypt to become a more open and more liberal state , through stimulation of its private sector . 
during our stay , certain members of our delegation made field visits to three projects in the Cairo area . 
the first , a community services centre for women from Helwan , is intended to empower women at the bottom of the economic scale , by helping them form a cooperative . 
the second , run by Egypt ' s electricity authority , trains people to work in the field of electrical transmission systems . 
the third , a human rights centre providing assistance to prisoners , seeks to provide prisoners and their families with the means to continue their education by supplying teaching materials and tutorial services . 
in addition , this project provides prisoners with legal aid in connection with human rights violations . 
honourable senators , in conclusion , I should like to state once again that I am firmly convinced that parliamentary associations and the delegations which participate in these conferences play a valuable role . 
the Inter - Parliamentary Union provides a forum where legislators from 135 countries can come together and discuss issues of international importance . 
it also gives us an opportunity to reinforce and support major foreign policy initiatives such as the ban on antipersonnel mines , increased links with the Asia - Pacific region , and a seat on the Security Council . 
i am proud of the work we accomplished and I want to state that the Canadian IPU group will continue to seek opportunities to enhance and expand its effectiveness at future IPU conferences . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak on this inquiry , it shall be considered to have been debated . 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Debate Continued 
leave having been given to revert to Order No. 1 under " Other Orders " : 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator Berntson : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to examine and report on the manner in which the chain of command of the Canadian Forces both in - theatre and at National Defence Headquarters , responded to the operational , disciplinary , decision - making and administrative problems encountered during the Somalia deployment to the extent that these matters have not been examined by the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces to Somalia ; 
that the Committee in examining these issues may call witnesses from whom it believes it may obtain evidence relevant to these matters including but not limited to : 
2 . the then Deputy Minister of National Defence ; 
3 . the then Acting Chief of Staff of the Minister of National Defence ; 
4 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( M. Campbell ) ; 
5 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( J . 
6 . the persons occupying the position of Judge Advocate General during the relevant period ; 
7 . the then Deputy Judge Advocate General ( litigation ) ; and 
8 . the then Chief of Defence Staff and Deputy Chief of Defence Staff . 
that seven Senators , nominated by the Committee of Selection act as members of the Special Committee , and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses under oath , to report from time to time and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to authorize television and radio broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee have the power to engage the services of such counsel and other professional , technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purposes of its examination ; 
that the political parties represented o the Special Committee be granted allocations for expert assistance with the work of the Committee ; 
that it be empowered to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada ; 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the Committee submit its report not later than one year from the date of it being constituted , provided that if the Senate is not sitting , the report will be deemed submitted on the day such report is deposited with the Clerk of the Senate ; and 
that the Special Committee include in its report , its findings and recommendations regarding the structure , functioning and operational effectiveness of National Defence Headquarters , the relationship between the military and civilian components of NDHQ , and the relationship among the Deputy Minister of Defence , the Chief of Defence Staff and the Minister of National Defence , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Forrestall , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin , that the motion be amended by adding in paragraph 2 the following : 
" 9 . the present Minister of National Defence . " . - ( 
honourable Senator Murray , P . C . ) . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , we have been told during this debate that we must put the Somalia scandals behind us and move on to other things . 
senator Rompkey and Senator Bryden have told us that the country must move on , that Parliament must move on , that the Canadian Armed Forces must move on . 
it is as if all the evidence of wrongdoing in high places could be wished away . 
it is as if we could all move on to other things , leaving behind us the cloud of disgrace that hangs over the Canadian Armed Forces and over our reputation as a country . 
honourable senators , we may move on , but the cloud will move with us and will stay with us until the truth is known and responsibility is determined . 
what is at issue in the motion we are now debating is not just Parliament ' s right to know the truth . 
the issue , rather , is our duty , our most serious duty , to hold to account those who act in our name and under the ultimate authority of Parliament . 
it is that issue of accountability that I would urge upon you in considering your response to this motion . 
there is to be a Canadian Military Grievance Board . 
there is to be a Military Police Complaints Commission . 
there is to be an independent implementation committee . 
there is to be an ombudsman . 
there are to be toll - free snitch lines , and civilian committees of one kind or another to oversee this and that . 
in such a multi - layered , multi - dimensional universe , accountability will not be more clear and more concentrated . 
it will be more diffuse . 
the Chief of Defence Staff and the Minister of National Defence will have more insulation , more cover , more distance between them and what is going on beneath them . 
is this really the lesson that our military , bureaucratic , and political leadership have drawn from the events in Somalia ? 
one hopes not . 
this is really a matter for another debate , but we should get at it soon . 
i am aware that there are amendments to the National Defence Act which will probably be here in due course . 
perhaps those will provide an opportunity to discuss some of these issues in the appropriate standing committee of the Senate . 
one of those civilians was killed . 
it is the opinion of the attending military physician , Dr. Armstrong , that he was executed gang - land style at close range . 
before the night was over , Dr. Armstrong had been told by a captain in our armed forces that a damage control operation was under way . 
we know what the phrase " damage control " means , do we not ? 
it is a euphemism for officially sanctioned misinformation and cover - up . 
indeed , the commanding officer on the scene , Colonel Labb é , caused an in - house investigation to be instituted by one of the people in his chain of command . 
as a result of that in - house investigation , the platoon was absolved of any criminal wrongdoing and praised for their efforts . 
colonel Labb é wrote to National Defence headquarters in Ottawa to recommend against a military police investigation which , in his words , would discover nothing new . 
a story was concocted , which is part of the strategy that is now a matter of public record , to the effect that the Somalis who were shot outside the compound were saboteurs . 
by this time , there had occurred a second even more atrocious incident . 
i refer , of course , to the March 16 torture , beating and death of the young Somali civilian Shidane Arone , who also had been enticed to the Canadian compound by bait in the form of food and water laid out by our soldiers . 
this incident caused a police investigation to take place , yet it was two weeks before the news of that atrocity was passed on to the then minister , Ms Campbell . 
where was that information during those 15 days ? 
did the senior officers in Somalia fail in their duty to inform senior officers at National Defence headquarters in Ottawa , or was the information passed on to Ottawa and covered up by the authorities here ? 
we do not know the answers to those questions . 
do you not think we have a duty to find out ? 
we do know for certain that during those two weeks outright lies were passed on to the minister and to the public concerning the circumstances of Shidane Arone ' s death and the condition of his body when it was examined . 
a strategy was devised , which is also part of the public record , to de - link the death of Shidane Arone and the attempted suicide of one of the perpetrators . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I regret to interrupt Honourable Senator Murray , but the time is elapsed . 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Murray : 
i am sorry , honourable senators . 
i am just getting started . 
before long , the existence of trophy photographs taken by our soldiers became public . 
courts martial were held , and convictions in some cases were recorded . 
the initial cover - up had unravelled quickly . 
however , let me point out that so far as the public record is concerned , none of those who posed for the trophy pictures has ever been disciplined . 
a dozen soldiers stopped by the bunker where the young Somali was being tortured and beaten . 
is it true , as reported in the media , that six of those soldiers have since been promoted , the official explanation being that since they were never charged with anything , their promotions could not fairly be denied ? 
the one thing we do know is that no senior military officer and no senior bureaucrat has ever resigned over what happened in Somalia . 
none has ever accepted responsibility ; none has ever been held to account . 
by November , 1994 , the so - called damage control exercise was unravelling . 
the efforts of some journalists had succeeded in uncovering part of the truth . 
the government decided that a public inquiry was necessary . 
the L é tourneau commission was appointed under the Inquires Act . 
i need not recall for honourable senators the unqualified and categorical assurances of the then Minister of National Defence , Mr. Collenette , that the L é tourneau commission would be able , fearlessly and fully , to establish the truth and assign responsibility . 
it was October , 1995 before the Somalia commission heard its first witness . 
approximately five months later , the commission announced that it intended to look into more recent developments , that is developments that had taken place since its appointment in November , 1994 . Six months after that - this brings us to September , 1996 - Prime Minister Chr é tien declared that the commission was going on too long and was costing too much . 
four months later , the new Minister of National Defence , Mr. Young , announced that the inquiry was being called off . 
when the Somalia commission reported in June , 1997 they were able to offer some findings and conclusions . 
they told us what the premature curtailment of their schedule had prevented them from pursuing , and they presented a convincing , documented and shocking narrative of official obstruction of their judicial inquiry . 
in chapter 38 of the report , honourable senators will find the commissioner ' s examination of the incident of March 4 , 1993 , of the allegations subsequently made of the deficiencies of the summary investigation and of the cover - up that ensued . 
let me read one sentence into the record . 
... the response of the chain of command ... was weak , untimely , inadequate , self - serving , unjustifiable and unbecoming the military leadership that our soldiers deserve and the Canadian public expects . 
it is said that he is now the subject of a career review board . 
to what purpose ? 
to facilitate his promotion ? 
to investigate further his response to the incident of March 4 , 1993 ? We do not know . 
vice Admiral Murray , whose implausible explanation of the delay in sending the military police to Somalia after March 4 is part of the commission ' s record , is now the assistant deputy minister of the Federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans . 
what the commission was not able to do because of the government decision to shut them down , is discussed in their report in a few words , when they say they : 
our schedule was aborted just as we were beginning to question the highest levels of leadership of the Canadian Forces and the Department of National Defence and to the allegations of cover - up with respect to some incidents .... The 
government ' s decision effectively allowed many of those in senior leadership positions during the deployment to avoid entirely accountability for their conduct , decisions , and actions during and after the mission . 
the commission added : 
once again , history repeats itself , in that only the lower ranks have been made to account for the marked failures of their leaders . 
these comments by the commission relate to the March 4 incident and subsequent related allegations . 
the commission was not able to touch at all on the March 16 torture , beating and death of Shidane Arone . 
i wish to draw the attention of honourable senators to the obstruction by senior people in the Canadian Armed Forces and the Department of National Defence of the work of the Somalia Commission . 
no subject is more relevant to the motion that is now before us and to the need to set up a Senate inquiry . 
honourable senators who wish to examine the subject in more detail may do so by reading chapter 39 of the commission report . 
it is clear from the narrative related by the commission that from the very beginning the military authorities and the Defence Department systematically obstructed the efforts of the Somalia Inquiry to obtain documents relevant to its mandate . 
as a result , the work of the inquiry was delayed . 
the staff was constantly preoccupied with these problems . 
the commission decided that the matter was so serious that they should launch special hearings on issues related to the non - production of documents . 
these hearings went on from the fall of 1995 through the winter of 1996 . 
some commentators have criticized the commission for having allowed itself to become bogged down in such a multitude of details , not all of them central to the inquiry . 
perhaps those critics are right , but the commission was faced early in its mandate with clear evidence of obstruction , document tampering and the concealment of documents so felt that it was absolutely necessary to pursue these matters wherever they land . 
the commission ran up against an ad hoc team of civilian officials and military officers called the Somalia Inquiry Liaison Team , better known by its acronym SILT . 
as to the modus operandi of this team , the commission said : 
... rather than assisting with the timely flow of information to our Inquiry , SILT adopted a strategic approach to deal with the inquiry and engaged in a tactical operation to delay or deny the disclosure of relevant information to us ... 
later , the commission reported the : 
... fragmented , dilatory and incomplete documentary record furnished to us by DND ... 
please bear in mind , honourable senators , that the people being spoken of in these terms are senior officers of the Canadian Armed Forces . 
they are senior people in the Department of National Defence , public servants who have taken an oath of allegiance , who have sworn to faithfully carry out the responsibilities entrusted to them in their high offices . 
bear in mind also that this was their response to a judicial inquiry established by Order in Council to ascertain the truth . 
here is what the judicial inquiry said of these people : 
during the hearings , many details of the affair were examined , and witnesses for the most part denied responsibility . 
it was clear , however , that the Department had failed blatantly to comply with our order for production . 
the actions of the Department were , we concluded , dishonest and deliberate . 
to cover the original deception , the severity of misdeeds had escalated from artifice to lies , to non - compliance with an order for production and , finally , to the attempted destruction of evidence . 
they are words of a commission of inquiry to describe the activities of public servants who are ultimately responsible to us , to Parliament . 
how can we , in good conscience , follow the advice of our friend Senator Rompkey to turn the page , to stop scrutinizing the past and to look to the future ? 
how could we possibly justify such an abdication of our responsibility to hold to account those who act under the authority of our laws ? 
deception , lies , artifice , non - compliance with a judicial order , attempted destruction of evidence - so far , those responsible for all of this have got away with it . 
the very people whose conduct was being investigated seem to have succeeded , in January 1997 , in persuading the then defence minister Mr. Young to close down the inquiry . 
from March 4 , 1993 , when the damage control operation began , through the orchestrated in - house investigation , through the conceiving , conspiring , conniving and sanctioning of lies and misinformation , through the tampering with documents and the destruction of evidence , to the successful campaign to shut down the Somalia inquiry , people in high places for whom we are ultimately responsible have evaded accountability , escaped responsibility and eluded the efforts of properly constituted civilian authority - Parliament , government , a Royal Commission - to establish the truth . 
for all that has happened , the bottom line so far is that no one in authority knew anything ; no one was responsible ; no one is accountable . 
how can we , in the Parliament of Canada , leave it at that ? 
if we do not insist on accountability , who will ? 
this is not a very pleasant matter , to put it mildly , but in one ' s mind ' s eye , one goes back to the night of March 16 and the beating and death of Shidane Arone at the hands of our men . 
the Somalia commission was shut down before they could even inquire into this . 
Shidane Arone was 16 years of age . 
he was 5 feet 4 inches in height . 
he weighed 120 pounds . 
he tried to steal some food and he was set upon by brutes who wear our uniform . 
during a long night , he was kicked and beaten and punched and suffocated and burned with cigars , beaten to a pulp with a metal bar , sodomized with a riot stick , and killed . 
in the words that we have heard so often from colleagues on the other side , they moved on to other things . 
still worse is the complicity from that day to this of those up the chain of command , military or civilian , who have dissembled and lied and covered up . 
this motion presents us with a moral choice - whether to do our duty and insist on accountability , ascertain the truth , fix responsibility , however difficult and painful it is , or whether to turn our backs and walk away . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I share in the horror that Senator Murray feels . 
we all feel that way about what happened to that young Somali . 
however , I remember , too , the dismay I felt when I looked at CPAC night after night at the conduct of this so - called commission of inquiry . 
for instance , Mr. Desbarats , who could not manage his way out of a wet Kleenex , tried to impugn the honour of an officer because he did not know what was happening five kilometres away . 
i remember that once our ship was firing badly and missing when normally we did not . 
we discovered later that our chief gunner ' s mate had heard in a letter that his wife had had an affair with an American soldier . 
he was devastated and his aim went wrong . 
if we had known that , we could have replaced him with someone else . 
we did not know . 
we were responsible , but things of this sort , unforeseeable , were happening in war time , all the time , everywhere . 
people in the commission of inquiry were trying to pin down an officer for something he could not possibly have known at that time . 
they were questioning with a sort of Kenneth Starr feeding frenzy that was debasing the Canadian idea of justice and injuring the morale of the armed forces . 
if they had treated those officers as fellow citizens with whom they wanted to cooperate in order to get at the truth , it would have been a totally different situation . 
they treated them from the beginning , before anything was proven , as guilty parties . 
i resented that and so did the military and they were right . 
it was time to put an end to that " Starr chamber . " 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
shame ! 
on motion of Senator Poulin , debate adjourned . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
eighth Annual Meeting with Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League - Inquiry 
hon. Dan Hays rose pursuant to notice of December 11 , 1997 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the Eighth Annual Meeting between the Canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group and the Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League , held in Japan , from November 8 to 16 , 1997 . 
honourable senators , I would like to address the Senate with respect to the eighth annual meeting of the Canada - Japan Interparliamentary Group and the Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League which took place in November of last year . 
these were the most successful bilateral meetings to date , both in terms of content and interest on the part of Diet members . 
to that effect , the Canadian delegation was honoured to receive the largest number of Diet members to ever attend the bilateral talks , which included numerous former ministers and former prime minister Kaifu . 
he was in office in 1989 when this organization was first created under his leadership and that of then prime minister Mulroney . 
the bilateral talks dealt with political and economic developments in Japan and in Canada , bilateral trade , investments , tourism , security issues , the forthcoming COP 3 , or Kyoto conference , APEC , as well as administrative reform and deregulation in Japan . 
the talks were particularly interesting in light of the current changes Japan is undergoing to its society , institutions and economy . 
changes to the fiscal structure of Japan ' s economy are of great importance to Canada . 
a highlight of the bilateral talks was the announcement that Prime Minister Hashimoto would announce , while on an official visit to Ottawa , that Japan would sign the Convention to Ban Anti - personnel Mines . 
senator Comeau spoke earlier about the good work of the Inter - Parliamentary Union . 
i can confirm that the Canada - Japan relationship , as well as the multilateral relationship that organization has with Asia - Pacific countries , has served Canada well in encouraging other countries to follow the Canadian example of signing the convention banning anti - personnel mines , which took place in December of last year . 
following the bilateral talks in Tokyo , the delegation visited the Island of Kyushu . 
Kyushu has a population of 15 million and produces 1 per cent of the world ' s GDP . 
it is sometimes referred to as silicon island because of its high - tech production . 
it offers great possibilities for Canadians in the export of forest products , housing products , consumer goods and agricultural products such as beef . 
we were able to meet with the Canadian consul , in addition to visiting a beef production cooperative and robotics plant on Kyushu Island . 
both Hiroshima and Nagasaki are on that island , and the delegation visited the Nagasaki Atomic Bomb Museum and Peace Garden . 
the global economy in technology has made it such that changes occurring in Japan and Asia will have an impact worldwide . 
in view of the importance of the Asia - Pacific to Canada , in particular our economy , it is of prime importance that Canadian parliamentarians be aware of these changes . 
two - way trade now amounts to $ 22 billion with Japan , exports and imports roughly in balance . 
Japanese tourism represented approximately $ 690 million in revenue to Canada in the last fiscal period . 
i also wish to note the professionalism and dedication of our Canadian embassy officials , and I encourage colleagues in this place to join the Canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Association . 
this eighth bilateral meeting and our multilateral relationship with the Asia - Pacific characterize a number of initiatives that affirm Canada ' s commitment to Japan and the Asia - Pacific as key to our future success as a trading nation . 
we share a Pacific coast with a diverse and dynamic series or set of countries that happen to be home to most of the world ' s peoples and responsible for an increasing share of the world ' s economic activity . 
in 1997 , Canada hosted the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum in January and the APEC conference in November - December . 
team Canada made a successful visit to the region . 
these and other important exchanges have served us well and will continue to serve us well . 
Japan is not as affected as a number of the countries due to its $ 100 billion trade surplus and $ 200 billion currency reserve , but even Japan ' s economy can be profoundly affected by what is happening in that region . 
in recent meetings of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , we learned of the Thai people , who are subject to IMF scrutiny at the present time , having gone through three revisions of their budget in recent months . 
they complain that program spending has produced a downward spiral in terms of their economy and economic activity , and this is typical of the problems occurring in that area . 
it is also important for us to understand the impact of this crisis because it is not within the range of the normal experiences we have observed in that region or anywhere since the Depression . 
if the region attempts to export its way out of the problem , it will have a profound effect on the economies into which they are exporting and the job creation there . 
in fact , the United States has said they will not accept countries in this crisis exporting principally into the United States to solve their problems . 
i will close with a quote that I think indicates the way in which the crisis will have to be met . 
Mr. Koppel writes : 
it is clear that Asia ' s substantial economic gains have been squeezed from minimal structural change . 
this refers to the great success some countries have had with very high year - over - year increases in GDP or a high growth rate . 
the article goes on to state : 
the region ' s leaders must now invest in the human resources and infrastructure needed to improve productivity across the entire economy , particularly in the agricultural and service sectors that employ 85 per cent of the work force . 
as the experience of Japan , Korea , and Taiwan suggests , increased agricultural productivity and consumption lay the foundation for a successful industrial growth strategy , since productive rural households have more cash to purchase agricultural equipment , invest in their children ' s education , and purchase consumer goods . 
the result is sustainable growth driven not only by exports , but by healthy , domestic demand . 
creating that healthy , domestic demand is a very significant and serious challenge for many of those countries . 
having been there in my role as Chairman of Canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Association and the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , I sincerely believe that they are up to the challenge . 
the time - frames within which that will be met , however , are not clear . 
i repeat , it is of absolute importance that we understand , as best we can , what will happen . 
i read that the world ' s growth , which was predicted to have been around 4 per cent , will probably turn out to be 2.5 per cent given the Asian crisis , and perhaps even less than that , depending upon the extent to which Latin American economies are affected by the crisis . 
i note that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs will hold follow - up hearings shortly on an interim report tabled by that committee on the Asia - Pacific region and its importance to us . 
i am encouraged by that and also by the interest of colleagues in this chamber in Canada and Japan , as well as our relationship with the region in general . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , in rising to speak to this report , allow me to thank Senator Hays for the leadership he has given to the Canada - Japan Interparliamentary Group as its Chairman since 1994 . Senator Hays has followed political and economic developments in Japan closely . 
he has stayed in touch with our friends in the Japanese Parliament , and they with him . 
the federal government has wisely taken advantage of Senator Hays ' knowledge and contacts in Japan , and has sought his assistance and cooperation in canvassing interest and support among Japanese legislators on such matters as the Asia - Pacific Conference , the Land Mines Treaty and the Kyoto Conference on the Environment . 
senator Hays succeeded another of our colleagues , Senator Oliver , as chairman of the Canada - Japan group . 
senator Oliver continues to take a close interest in what is happening in Japan and in our relationship with Japan . 
their success as chairmen demonstrates , among other things , the valuable continuity that comes from having a senator at the head of an interparliamentary group such as this one . 
i have no doubt that one day our friends in the House of Commons will insist that it is their turn to be chairman . 
it occurs to me that since Japan , like Canada , has a bicameral Parliament , we might consider providing for that day by having co - chairs , one from the Senate and one from the House of Commons , as is done with the Canada - U.S. parliamentary group . 
it is important that we maintain and , if possible , increase our contacts with Japanese parliamentarians and political figures . 
Japan must undertake extensive economic , financial and administrative changes . 
the social and - in the large sense of the word - cultural implications must be daunting . 
in the past few years , the political scene has been more turbulent than at any time in the post - war history of that country . 
since we were there in November , the largest opposition party , the New Frontier Party , which was itself in part a breakaway offshoot of the governing Liberal Democrats , seems to have unravelled . 
this is only the most recent example of what might be called political restructuring . 
while Japanese politics has always been marked by factionalism and conflict of strong personalities , I do believe that the present and recent upheavals reflect also the difficult dilemmas that confront politicians in that country by reason of the financial and economic predicament in which it finds itself . 
the most obvious of those dilemmas , and the one which must cut very deeply at the level of Japanese voters and their elected representatives , is whether the national , political , social and economic fabric can stand the abandonment of the no - layoff practice that is the result of a lifetime employment tradition in Japanese companies . 
Japanese unemployment , now at 3 per cent , is described as being at record highs . 
the response of the Japanese political leadership , as well as of its political and corporate leadership , to this and many other pressing and urgent questions of restructuring will have an important impact on the Japanese economy and , therefore , on the world economy . 
Canadian parliamentarians do well to keep in touch with them . 
Japan is , after all , as Senator Hays has pointed out , the second biggest economy in the world . 
as it happens , it is Canada ' s second largest trading partner . 
while the volume of our trade , at $ 22 billion annually , does not even approach the size of our trade with the United States , it is still significant , and quite important in some regions of our country . 
sawmills are closing in British Columbia , for example , because of soft demand for lumber in Japan . 
the economic and financial crisis in southeast Asia could not have come at a worse time for Japan . 
the so - called " Asian ` flu " seems to have begun in Thailand and , as happens with such a virus , it exposed and worsened economic and financial weaknesses in southeast Asia and then South Korea . 
the timing was terrible for Japan because the Japanese domestic economy was already flat . 
fiscal stimulus , urged by many , was problematic because government deficits were already considered too high . 
Japan had still not absorbed all the repercussions of the spectacular speculative boom of the 1980 s , the so - called " bubble " which sent real estate and other values soaring and then plummeting . 
it left the financial sector , among others , badly shaken . 
it must be noted , as the Governor of the Bank of Canada has done in a recent speech , that Japan does have the financial capacity to cope with its banking problems , and measures to address these problems and to boost economic recovery have been taken . 
our interest in the success of our Japanese political friends in dealing with these problems is obvious . 
the problems in their domestic economy , and the more serious weaknesses in some other Asian economies , seem to feed on each other . 
the impact of all this on the world economy and on commodity prices for nickel and copper , for example , have a negative impact on such companies as Inco and Noranda . 
i saw a press report recently to the effect that Seagram ' s had suffered a 50 per cent fall in sales of liquor to Asia because of the region ' s currency and economic troubles . 
beyond the economics , and inevitably affected by it , are the questions touching on Japan ' s growing but special role in regional and world security and international development issues . 
the months and years ahead in Japan will be truly challenging for that country ' s political , bureaucratic and business leadership , and for the population as a whole . 
i made my first visit to Japan more than 30 years ago as a tourist , and I have been back there over the years at periodic intervals on government or parliamentary business . 
this was my third meeting in as many years as a member of the Canadian parliamentary delegation . 
i came away , as I believe did all our Canadian colleague , and as Senator Hays said , confident that Japan will come through the looming challenges stronger than ever . 
the opportunities that were provided to us , through the excellent work of the Canadian Embassy in Tokyo , to meet with Japanese business people and with Canadians doing business in Japan was extremely valuable to us in improving our understanding of the Japanese scene and of the nature of our commercial and political relationship . 
the attendance of Japanese parliamentarians was more numerous , and their participation more active and over a broader agenda than at any previous meeting I have attended . 
the Canada - Japan Interparliamentary Group is one which I would strongly recommend to our colleagues in this chamber and in the House of Commons . 
it is very much in our national interest that we maintain the closest and most active relationship with our counterparts in Japan . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senators wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein rose pursuant to notice of February 12 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to Canada ' s policy respecting the Iraq crisis . 
those debates project interesting snapshots of Canada ' s history on the run . 
with rare exception , the debate last week in the other place lacked facts and , therefore , clarity , cohesion or context respecting Canada ' s aims , objectives or options . 
above all , we are missing current facts and the invaluable trail of facts that led from Iraq ' s unconditional agreement to unlimited UN inspection as a precondition to cessation of hostilities in 1991 , to the present impasse . 
by comparison , honourable senators , I recently read Churchill ' s war speeches given in the Parliament at Westminster in camera during World War II. 
they serve as models of perception and precision . 
honourable senators , what should be Canada ' s preconditions to war engagement at this time ? 
our policy appears to me to be more opaque than pellucid , even more so than before . 
let me raise a number of questions that I hoped would have been addressed more cogently by all parties in the other place . 
first , what are Canada ' s primary war aims ? 
are the American war aims the same ? 
if they differ , how and why ? 
second , what are Canada ' s precise political and geopolitical objectives respecting the United Nations and that region ? 
what of the other aberrant , adjacent nations in the region ? 
third , what are Canada ' s terms of engagement and the nature of the command structure under which Canadians may be placed in harm ' s way ? 
in Canada ' s post - military era , as Richard Gwyn so aptly put it the other day , are Canada ' s defence forces appropriately organized to efficiently and effectively respond to such a crisis ? 
fourth , what principles of international law govern Canada ' s participation in this engagement ? 
honourable senators , what is the precise role of the UN in the current situation with respect to the command structure and diplomatic actions ? 
fifth , what specific UN resolutions have been breached , and why has it taken the UN or the UN coalition so long to hold Iraq to account ? 
sixth , what are the consequences for peace and security in the region if the primary war aims of the United States are achieved ? 
seventh , what happened to the sanctions option heralded by some in this chamber and the other place in 1991 as an alternative to the Gulf War ? 
if they failed , why and when ? 
are there any sanction alternatives left ? 
eighth , if Iraq , as a condition of cessation of hostilities in the Gulf War agreed to open arms inspection , who is responsible for the delay in enforcing the inspection process since 1991 and why ? 
ninth , what happened to the Hague War Crimes Tribunal initiative for war crimes against humanity against the leadership and the specifically named members of the leadership cadre in Iraq , as a prophylactic against egregious or abhorrent individual conduct since 1993 , when that tribunal was re - established ? 
tenth , what happened to countries whose exports provided - and may still be providing - military weapons or elements necessary to build or rebuild Iraq ' s chemical war arsenal and their military delivery systems ? 
those countries were listed and named in 1991 , and included major members of the Gulf coalition such as Britain , France and Germany , and non - members of the coalition such as China . 
what has happened since ? 
eleventh , what steps are being taken , or will be taken , to limit the impact on innocent civilian populations in Iraq and its adjacent neighbours from chemically poisoned emissions by the proposed bomb strikes ? 
twelfth , what happened to the initial steps taken by the free world after the Gulf War to build an anti - authoritarian , democratic coalition within and without Iraq to provide a political alternative to the people of Iraq ? 
honourable senators , I raise these questions in order to provide - at least for myself - a clearer framework within which to consider Canada ' s role in the Iraq crisis . 
it is clear that Iraq has obviously breached its international obligations . 
it is clear that Iraq is in breach of UN resolutions . 
it is equally clear , however , that there are serious reservations within the Security Council and beyond , within the Gulf coalition and with adjacent neighbouring states who were part of the original Gulf coalition , and who are not yet prepared to support America ' s war aims . 
some say adjacent Arab states are unwilling because they are still considered to be in harm ' s way , and threatened , since the Gulf War mission was not satisfactorily completed . 
what of Russia and its substantial outstanding debt with Iraq , its trade links and desire to regain influence in that region ? 
what of France , its trade links and its equal desire to gain influence in this region ? 
what of China , in its continuing efforts to be a supplier in the arms trade with Iraq ? 
honourable senators , what did happen last September 23 in the United Nations when China , Russia and France threatened to use their vetoes in the Security Council against modest United Nations sanctions to prohibit international air travel by certain Iraq officials ? 
there is no doubt in my mind that the failure to approve these most modest sanctions sent a signal to Hussein that the Gulf coalition was weakening and losing its political will . 
it encouraged him to intensify his challenge to the work of the UN inspection team . 
serious questions , honourable senators , but little or no facts . 
in future , Canada will be approached from time to time to support military intervention . 
what are - or should be - the guidelines and principles set out in advance as benchmarks of action for both parliamentarians and the Canadian public ? 
it seems to me that we are faced with a crisis in Iraq because of the failure of political will to deal appropriately with the threat that Saddam Hussein and his leadership cadre has posed to his neighbours and to the stability and peace of the region since 1991 , when he suffered his weakest moments . 
that threat continued unabated , and indeed grew , after the Gulf War in that region and elsewhere . 
will that situation pertain if America ' s war aims are achieved ? 
before honourable senators offer their views , I would suggest it might be helpful , as I said at the outset , to examine the debates in the Senate on or about November 20 , 1990 . 
many of the arguments which were heard then are still appropriate today . 
i await , and welcome , other senators ' views before I attempt to answer some of these questions myself that I have raised in this inquiry . 
honourable senators , to place this crisis in at least one historical perspective : 
almost 1,600 years ago , St. Augustine , while in North Africa , wrote his enduring classic , City of God , where he contrasted the spiritual gulf between the ideas of Jerusalem and the ideas of Babylon . 
regrettably for Canada and the world , and despite the onslaught of the intervening centuries , that gulf still exists . 
the human condition , honourable senators , remains ever - ready for renovation . 
i eagerly await other senators ' thoughts on Canada ' s policy on this crisis . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 40 
Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Canadian War Museum 
statement on Holocaust Museum - Conformity with Recommendations of Veterans Affairs Subcommittee 
olympic Winter Games 
congratulations to Gold Medal Winning Bobsled Team at Nagano , Japan 
Asian Community in British Columbia 
congratulations on Twenty - Fifth Anniversary of United Chinese Community Enrichment Services Society 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
question PERIOD 
prime Minister ' s Office 
appointment of Ethics Counsellor Responsible to Parliament - Government Position 
health 
cancellation of Research Study on Seniors with Osteoporosis - Possibility of Restoration of Funding - Government Position 
human Rights 
refusal of Prime Minister to Meet with Chinese Human Rights Leader During Recent Visit - Support for United Nations Resolution on Human Rights - Government Position 
the Economy 
crisis in Health Care Funding - Cuts to Transfer Payments to Provinces - GoVernment Policy 
human Resources Development 
availability of Retraining for Unemployed - Incentives Available through Revenue Canada - Government Position 
health 
compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Increase in Payments to Provinces - Government Position 
labour 
review of Canada Post Corporation - Request for Progress Report 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
aboriginal Governance 
report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services Presented and Printed as Appendix 
orders OF THE DAY 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
point of Order 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Canadian War Museum 
statement on Holocaust Museum - Conformity with Recommendations of Veterans Affairs Subcommittee 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , earlier today the Canadian War Museum issued a very significant press release . 
among its statements was that the Holocaust story could best be told in a separate venue , fully dedicated to it . 
the board went on to congratulate the Senate Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs for its helpfulness in developing a public and institutional consensus on this issue . 
they handled the matter with dignity , and with the kind of sober second thought in which all of us in this chamber should take great pride . 
i thank them each individually and as a composite group . 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , Senator Carstairs has stolen my thunder somewhat . 
i talked with Senator Phillips about an hour ago . 
Ms Adrienne Clarkson , Chairwoman of the Canadian Museum of Civilization Corporation Board of Trustees , announced today that the board has accepted the recommendation of its Canadian War Museum Advisory Committee to proceed with the expansion of the War Museum with all possible urgency . 
the space made available in an expanded War Museum will be required to tell the story of Canada ' s military past . 
the Holocaust story can best be told in a separated venue fully dedicated to it . 
the Corporation will assist in the exploration of an alternative site for the eventual development of a stand - alone and independent Holocaust Museum . 
the Canadian Museum of Civilization Corporation will continue to support the development of a Holocaust Museum . 
the Board also accepted the recommendations of the War Museum Advisory Committee , chaired by the Honourable Barney Danson , to increase the Committee ' s membership to include representatives of the Royal Canadian Legion , the National Council of Veterans ' Associations , the Friends of the Canadian War Museum , the Departments of National Defence and Veterans ' Affairs Canada . 
in addition , historians Robert Bothwell , Jack Granatstein and Terry Copp will join the committee . 
other members include General Paul Manson , Vice - Chairman of the Committee ; Lt . General Charles Balzile ; Major General Robert LaRose ; Richard Neilson , noted film documentary producer ; journalist and veteran Douglas Fisher ; veteran Patricia Toner ; educator Claudette Roy ; and business executive Adam Zimmerman . 
the Canadian Museum of Civilization Corporation will be represented by Ms Clarkson , Chairperson ; Dr. George F . MacDonald , President and CEO ; and Joseph Geurts , Chief Operating Officer . 
Dan Glenney , acting Director General of the Canadian War Museum , will act as secretary to the Committee . 
the Board felt that the briefs presented to the recent hearings by the Senate Subcommittee on Veterans ' Affairs were helpful in developing a public and institutional consensus on this issue . 
in addition , the Canadian War Museum Advisory Committee will undertake without delay further consultation with interest groups and individuals on matters relating to the War Museum . 
the Honourable Senator Phillips , of course , as the chairman , did a marvellous job . 
senator Cools , the deputy chair , did an equally good job . 
the other members of the committee were Senator Chalifoux , Senator Forest and myself . 
[ later ] 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Carstairs for her statement concerning the work of the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs . 
paraphrasing Sir Wilfrid Laurier and Sir Winston Churchill , never in the field of human endeavours has so much been done so fast by so few , and it was the Senate that did it . 
the Senate should take pride in the work the subcommittee did under the extraordinary , friendly , efficient and tough leadership of its chairman , Senator Phillips , who unfortunately , as you know , is at the Grace Hospital today . 
he did not miss one meeting . 
senator Carstairs mentioned some of the members who participated , but I would like to mention all of them . 
senator Jessiman was the member for the Conservative Party , and the committee also included the distinguished Senator Forest and Senator Chalifoux from Alberta , and Senator Cools from Ontario . 
we heard 50 witnesses in one week , a week that the Senate was not sitting . 
yes , I had the honour of participating in this committee , although I am still waiting to become a member of a standing committee . 
honourable senators know that I want to be a full member of a committee , and I will fight until I am . 
however , I was there for 50 of the 50 witnesses and did not miss a minute , as was Senator Kelly . 
we were not members of the committee , but we attended every minute of those meetings , including the in camera meetings , because of our interest on behalf of the Senate . 
esteemed colleagues , the Senate has a role to play in this country . 
the sensitivity of the subject was extraordinary , and a resolution of the issues was important for the sanity of Canada . 
Mr. Trudeau told the national Liberal caucus when I was there to always be careful not to pit groups against groups and people against people , and unfortunately that is what was taking place here . 
the Holocaust Gallery can stand on its two feet somewhere else , as everyone now agrees . 
i believe the museum made this decision so rapidly because of the determination of the Senate subcommittee . 
i , too , wish Senator Phillips a speedy recovery . 
we will wait for him to write the final report . 
although I am not a full member , I will be there , of course , like glue , to finish the work . 
olympic Winter Games 
congratulations to Gold Medal Winning Bobsled Team at Nagano , Japan 
hon. Catherine Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I rise in this chamber today to pay tribute to Dave ` Eli ' MacEachern . 
for those of you who are not aware , Mr. MacEachern is a native of Prince Edward Island , and this past weekend he became the proud owner of a shiny new gold medal in the two - man bobsled event at the Winter Olympics in Japan . 
little did he know that 25 years later he would be pushing a bobsled to Olympic Gold half a world away from his island home . 
Dave MacEachern and Pierre Lueders became the first Canadian team ever to capture the two - man event , and it is only the second time in 62 years that a North American bobsled team has garnered the gold . 
honourable senators , all Islanders are extremely proud of Dave MacEachern ' s effort on behalf of his sport , as indeed is Canada as a whole . 
to show that pride , prior to the event a petition with 17,500 names was sent to Dave in Japan to boost his spirits . 
it must have worked , because Mr. MacEachern has become the first Islander to ever bring home the gold . 
Dave , you are a role model and a true champion . 
congratulations ! 
Asian Community in British Columbia 
congratulations on Twenty - Fifth Anniversary of United Chinese Community Enrichment Services Society 
hon. Pat Carney : 
honourable senators , I bring to the attention of the Red Chamber the fact that one week ago today marked the 25 th anniversary of SUCCESS , the United Chinese Community Enrichment Services Society , which performs an outstanding service in integrating Asian Canadians and other visible minorities into our Canadian community . 
success was incorporated in 1973 . 
it started in a church basement , a small group of people meeting under the chairmanship of Maggie Ip , a teacher of Shanghainese origin . 
its mandate is to help immigrants overcome language and cultural barriers to achieve self - reliance so that they may fully contribute to Canada . 
it provides community services to the Chinese community in B.C. ' s lower mainland , including family and youth counselling , employment training , group and community development , settlement services , language training , programs for women , seniors , and youths . 
it is because of SUCCESS that a young Asian youth can learn canoeing in a British Columbia park or a Chinese granny , who is restricted by her language to her home in Vancouver , can receive assistance and help in becoming part of the wider community . 
in 1997 , from that small group meeting in the church basement , SUCCESS served 210,000 clients in 23 languages from 11 locations in the Lower Mainland . 
i have been happy as a former MP and senator to open some of those locations in the appropriate ceremonies . 
it has a small staff under Executive Director Lillian To , and works with thousands of volunteers to conduct its delivery services . 
between 40 to 50 per cent of the agency ' s annual operating budget of $ 5.8 million is raised from the community itself . 
success holds two major fund - raising events a year : the Walk with the Dragon and the gala dinner . 
that dinner was attended by myself and by Senator Ray Perrault , who often twins me at these events . 
it was attended also by the appropriate federal minister , Raymond Chan , Secretary of State for Asia - Pacific , Premier Glen Clark and most of his cabinet , the mayor and many of the councillors of the city of Vancouver . 
regrettably , no Reform MP attended . 
reform is a party which has yet to recognize the contribution that Chinese Canadians are making to our province . 
its program was aired by Television Broadcast ( HK ) Limited , one of the biggest TV enterprises in Asia . 
it involved an extravaganza , with a crew of 60 top artists and stage - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt your statement , Senator Carney , but the three - minute period has expired . 
is leave granted to continue , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Carney : 
it was broadcast to viewers in Hong Kong , China , Singapore , Vancouver , and Toronto . 
since today ' s paper reminds Canadians that 11.2 per cent of Canadians are from visible minorities and that nearly one - third of the population of greater Vancouver of 1.8 million are of Asian origin , I would ask the chamber to join with me in congratulating SUCCESS on its success in helping a community that is remarkably free of racial tension , in no small measure due to its efforts . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I would like to draw your attention to a distinguished visitor in our gallery . 
before I introduce him , I must give you the background of the situation . 
two relatives were invited to speak on behalf of all . 
honourable senators , I am delighted to call your attention to the presence of Jules Lesage and his wife . 
Mr. Lesage is the son of Jean Lesage , the former premier of Quebec and former minister of the federal government . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 4 , to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 57 ( 1 ) ( f ) , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
prime Minister ' s Office 
appointment of Ethics Counsellor Responsible to Parliament - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in 1993 , the government made a commitment in Red Book I , chapter 6 , page 95 . 
the chapter was entitled , " Governing with Integrity . " 
the language was very clear : 
in particular , a Liberal government will appoint an independent Ethics Counsellor to advise both public officials and lobbyists in the day - to - day application of the Code of Conduct for Public Officials . 
the Ethics Counsellor will be appointed after consultation with the leaders of all parties in the House of Commons and will report directly to Parliament . 
it is of interest to note that one of the authors of Red Book I was none other than the present Minister of Finance . 
as reported today , we have yet another ruling by - and I quote The Ottawa Citizen : : 
... prime Minister Jean Chr é tien ' s watchdog over Cabinet ethics ... 
this is one of the more accurate descriptions I have seen of the so - called Ethics Counsellor . 
the controversy was blamed on senior Finance Department officials . 
honourable senators , what we have here now , in fact , is a top - down , totally controlled regime operating within the realm of the Prime Minister ' s Office . 
the Prime Minister names the counsellor , sets the rules which he refuses to share with the public , conducts the inquiry in secret , and only lets Parliament and the public in on the coy arrangement once the decision is announced . 
we have seen this time and time again with respect to such ministers as Dupuy and Collenette , and former minister Doug Young who , as we all know , used all kinds of despicable adjectives when speaking of senators on this side , and of people in the lobbying business . 
when will the government make good on its commitment and name an Ethics Counsellor answerable to , and responsible to , Parliament ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i regret that the honourable senator may be suggesting that Mr. Wilson ' s assessment of this particular situation was not in accordance with what would be regarded as a very careful and accurate examination of what might have been perceived by some as a conflict . 
Mr. Wilson had been appointed to make such an examination . 
he brought forward what is considered by me , by the government and , I am sure , by the vast majority of the public , to be a fair and accurate assessment and conclusion . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I make no such suggestion , but how are we to judge if we do not know the rules or procedures , and we are kept ignorant of how all of these decisions are made ? 
i have two supplementary questions . 
at the beginning of this new session of Parliament , did the government live up to its other commitment and consult the leaders of all parties in the House of Commons on this matter ? 
in other words , was there an effort to reaffirm the appointment of Howard Wilson as Ethics Counsellor ? 
senator Graham : 
i am not aware , honourable senators , as to who was consulted , but I shall endeavour to find out . 
senator LeBreton : 
while doing that , could you determine for us who pays Mr. Wilson ' s salary ? 
is it the Privy Council Office or is it some other department or agency of government ? 
senator Graham : 
Yes. 
health 
cancellation of Research Study on Seniors with Osteoporosis - Possibility of Restoration of Funding - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , in December 1995 , the former Minister of Health Diane Marleau held a news conference announcing federal funding for a five - year study of osteoporosis through nine centres across the country . 
this disease affects 1.5 million Canadians and costs the health care system some $ 400 million per year . 
funding for this study was provided for in the federal budget and therefore is built into the existing fiscal framework . 
this announcement is an example of how this government is prioritizing its spending to better serve Canadians by making efficient use of their tax dollars . 
is the government committed to seeing this research through to its conclusion ? 
specifically , will the Minister of Finance restore the funding to Health Canada in order to ensure that , indeed , we do make " efficient use of tax dollars " and not throw years of work and $ 3.5 million down the drain , not to mention the harm that the cancellation of this study is causing to seniors who suffer from osteoporosis ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a very valid question . 
i shall attempt to bring forward a more complete answer with respect to osteoporosis , which is of concern to many Canadians , and to determine whether the particular fund to which my honourable friends refers will be restored . 
senator Spivak : 
as a comment , I hope that the Leader of the Government , who has tremendous influence , would use his advocacy to ensure that this funding is a part of the federal budget which is to be laid before Parliament next week . 
we look forward to seeing that item included . 
senator Graham : 
i will do my best to influence every part of the budget that will be brought down next Tuesday . 
human Rights 
refusal of Prime Minister to Meet with Chinese Human Rights Leader During Recent Visit - Support for United Nations Resolution on Human Rights - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , last Thursday , February 12 , two important visitors to Ottawa made their way to Parliament Hill ; one being Cuban Vice - President Carlos Lage and the other being one of China ' s most prominent political prisoners and human rights activists , Wei Jingsheng . 
as honourable senators may know from media reports , it was only Mr. Lage who was able to meet the Prime Minister . 
Mr. Wei , who was responsible for spearheading the fight for democracy in China , had to settle for a brief meeting with the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Lloyd Axworthy . 
Mr. Wei expressed great concern over Canada ' s apparent disregard for human rights in China , stating that the Chinese people will lose respect for Canada if this federal government continues to act " cowardly " by refusing to stand up to the politicians in Beijing on the issue of human rights . 
he noted that when democracy comes to China , as it inevitably will , the Chinese people will remember whether Canadians stood with them against tyranny . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate explain why the Prime Minister refused to meet with this world renowned leader of the human rights struggle for China , and also explain what measures the government has taken to ensure freedom for other political dissidents and prisoners of conscience in China ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Mr. Wei received a full hearing of his views on China from the government and the Parliament of Canada during his time in Ottawa . 
he met with Minister Axworthy and the Secretary of State for the Asia - Pacific , Mr. Raymond Chan . 
he also spoke before the Standing Committee of the House of Commons on Foreign Affairs and International Trade . 
a central thrust of Canada ' s foreign policy towards China is to promote a greater respect for human rights by both supporting and initiating positive change . 
i know that Honourable Senator Kinsella is a leading advocate of human rights not only in his native New Brunswick but in our country and in other parts of the world . 
in April of 1997 , Minister Axworthy announced a package of human rights initiatives between Canada and China . 
a major component of the package was the establishment of a joint committee on human rights to address our concerns on human rights issues . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government will recall that last year his government did not endorse the resolution of the United Nations condemning China ' s human rights policy . 
could the minister advise the Senate whether or not the government will continue to demonstrate to the world that when it comes to supporting a United Nations resolution condemning human rights violations in China , it will be on side ? 
senator Graham : 
i believe , honourable senators , we are pointing in the right direction because the committee to which I referred has met twice in 1997 . 
they met in Ottawa in July , and they met in October in Beijing . 
these initiatives are clear indications of Canada ' s commitment to promote change through ongoing dialogue with the Chinese government . 
the Economy 
crisis in Health Care Funding - Cuts to Transfer Payments to Provinces - GoVernment Policy 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government . 
it seems that not a single day passes without a local paper talking about the crisis in the hospitals . 
wherever the region , the situation is systemic and problematic . 
health care is a priority for this government . " 
since 1993 the Liberals have cut the level of cash transfers for health by some $ 6.3 billion . 
since government must be responsible for its actions , what is its plan to resolve this crisis it has created in the area of health care ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is fair to say that the reduction in public sector health care expenditures is the result of the overall restructuring of the provincial health care programs designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Canada ' s health care programs . 
the Government of Canada has increased the CHST cash floor to $ 12.5 billion annually , starting in 1997 - 98 . 
this amount is consistent with the recommendations of the National Forum on Health . 
senator Jessiman : 
what the Finance Minister did not say is that in seven of Canada ' s ten provinces , cash transfers would continue to fall over the next five years . 
if health care is a priority for this government , can the leader explain why it is not acting with more haste ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , it is important to note that CHST transfers , including cash , in what are referred to as tax points , now total more than $ 25 billion a year and will rise again in 1998 - 99 . 
a stable , predictable funding plan will result . 
human Resources Development 
availability of Retraining for Unemployed - Incentives Available through Revenue Canada - Government Position 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , the government has stated that both health care and education are priorities . 
certainly , the Canadian people have said so very strongly . 
the Prime Minister has also appeared recently on television giving speeches about education and announcing as a priority a fund to overcome impediments to young people in getting post - secondary education . 
however , the government has not attacked the other primary issues confronting Canadians , the lack of employment in Canada and the problems associated with competing internationally ? 
the issues facing Canadians are how to gain and maintain employment , how to get an education and how to compete and trade internationally . 
i am particularly addressing IPSCO , Inc. and the excellent example that the company has set in Western Canada by not only diversifying its trade into other countries , but by taking care to ensure that its employees receive the kinds of skills necessary to compete appropriately in the world . 
only then did IPSCO discover that taking post - secondary education is a taxable benefit in the hands of the employee . 
will the government undertake to ensure that this situation is corrected immediately ? 
will the government also undertake that , in the budget that is to be made public next week , education will receive priority ? 
i am not referring here to just one endowment such as the Millennium Fund , but to true , sensible incentives for retraining built into Revenue Canada ' s programs ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator raises a valid point , and I shall bring that matter to the attention of my colleagues . 
senator Andreychuk : 
has Revenue Canada been instructed by the cabinet or the minister to make this problem a priority and to correct it immediately ? 
senator Graham : 
not to my knowledge , honourable senators , but as I just indicated , I make that undertaking to my honourable friend . 
health 
compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Increase in Payments to Provinces - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
yesterday , Canadian sufferers of hepatitis C received word that federal , provincial and territorial health ministers had failed to agree on how to compensate them for contracting the infection through tainted blood . 
despite the provincial ministers ' failure to reach agreement on this issue , it was indicated that the current carrying costs for victims of hepatitis C , such as medical and social assistance costs , have stretched already waning health budgets . 
the ministers argued that cuts to federal transfer payments for health care greatly contributed to their inability to react in an expedient manner . 
it is estimated that there are roughly 60,000 victims of hepatitis C in Canada . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate when and , more important , how the federal government will assume its political and financial responsibilities in resolving the hepatitis C compensation issue ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for his question because that subject is certainly of concern to Canadians in every province , and most particularly to those who have been infected . 
very careful attention was paid by the federal Minister of Health and by his counterparts in the provinces in preparing for yesterday ' s meetings in Toronto . 
while they did not come to any final agreement , they have agreed to continue to work together to put in place a compensation scheme . 
the Government of Canada , of course , is committed to the successful completion of these discussions , as I am sure all other provincial governments are , and while they did not reach an agreement on a joint package , they indicated that progress was made , and that further discussions would take place . 
senator Atkins : 
could the federal government consider increasing the block payments it makes to the provinces , in order to help them compensate some of these victims who will need a great deal of financial help ? 
senator Graham : 
the Government of Canada is committed to helping those who have been affected under such tragic circumstances . 
that is a commitment . 
labour 
review of Canada Post Corporation - Request for Progress Report 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
my question concerns a top - to - bottom review of Canada Post which might result in ways to avoid future postal interruptions . 
during the consideration of the Postal Services Continuation Bill , Bill C - 24 , in Committee of the Whole , this chamber received assurances that outside management consultants and experts in industrial relations would be brought in to Canada Post to study it from top to bottom so that ways could be found to solve its problems . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate make representations to the Minister of Labour regarding the urgent need to conduct this review as quickly as possible so that management and workers of the fourth - largest corporation in the country will never again be able to treat the Canadian public and the small business community as hostages ? 
while he is at it , could the minister also provide a report on any progress made to date in solving the many problems in the Post Office ? 
many employees in the postal services have concerns about processes that will be in place until the next bargaining round . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would be very happy to do so . 
as usual , the Honourable Senator Robertson has brought forth a very timely reminder of commitments that were made , and I shall consult with the appropriate minister - and indeed with the proper official in the postal department - in attempting to bring forward an answer as soon as possible . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
aboriginal Governance 
report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services Presented and Printed as Appendix 
leave having been given to revert to Presentation of Reports from Standing or Special Committees : 
hon. Charlie Watt , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal peoples has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Tuesday December 9 , 1997 to examine and report on the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples respecting Aboriginal governance , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary and to adjourn from place to place inside and outside of Canada , for the purpose of its examination . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration and the report thereon of that committee are appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
CHARLIE WATT 
chairman 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Watt , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
orders OF THE DAY 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool , for the second reading of Bill C - 17 , to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I am pleased today to speak to Bill C - 17 . 
in 1984 , I was honoured to co - chair a task force on Crown corporations . 
this was part of the transition exercise as we moved from the Liberal administration to the Progressive Conservative government . 
our group was given two tasks : 
as you know , Teleglobe was , in fact , privatized in 1987 . 
another very closely related subject that I would like to raise relates to the implications of this bill for competition in domestic telecommunications and , in particular , competition in the local telecommunication market . 
the bill has been positioned by Senator Poulin as a step towards introducing competition in international telecommunications and , as necessary , to implementing Canada ' s obligations under the World Trade Organization . 
these are laudable objectives , and ones which I am sure everyone in this chamber supports . 
over the past decade we have seen the benefits of competition in domestic telecommunications . 
rates have fallen and services have expanded . 
this has been to the substantial benefit of business and individual consumers . 
i think it is fair to say , however , that domestic competition originated in the market - and indeed was forced on to us by the market . 
at first one , and then a few other small pioneers decided to challenge the monopoly telephone companies and were ultimately successful . 
government policy , in fact , followed the market ; it did not lead the market . 
i fully acknowledge that there was a Progressive Conservative government in power at that time , but I fear that we may be following the same course in international telecommunications . 
if I may digress here for a moment , it was the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , chaired by my colleague Senator Oliver , in its pre - study of the Telecommunications Act , that was instrumental in developing a legislative framework for competition and choice in telecommunications . 
this is the type of very important work that the Senate does , but for which it rarely gets credit . 
however , to return to my point , I am concerned that Bill C - 17 may be a little behind the times in terms of the liberalization of international telecommunications that is now upon us . 
that liberalization is due to market forces and the General Agreement on Trade in Services , or GATS , on basic telecommunications , to which Canada is a signatory and to which Senator Poulin referred at length in her remarks yesterday . 
in July 1995 , the government announced a policy review of Teleglobe and of international telecommunications . 
no results of that review have ever been released . 
instead , the government has issued the occasional press release , or letter , and engaged in incremental actions . 
if the government has a policy framework for the regulation of international telecommunications , it has not been enunciated . 
with all respect to Senator Poulin and her colleagues , it is very difficult to evaluate this bill because we do not know for what purposes or to what end it will be used to regulate or advance Canada ' s interests in international telecommunications . 
let me turn now to Teleglobe . 
as you know , Teleglobe was set up in 1948 as a Crown corporation in order to implement Canada ' s obligations under the Commonwealth Telecommunications Agreement . 
during its entire existence , Teleglobe has been treated as a chosen instrument of the Government of Canada in overseas telecommunications . 
by way of a " gentleman ' s agreement " - and I am not being sexist , because that is what it was called - Teleglobe was assured of a monopoly in routing oversees telecommunications traffic . 
that monopoly began in 1948 when Teleglobe bought out Marconi ' s interest in Canada , and persists largely today intact , even after privatization . 
the monopoly and chosen instrument status were probably quite proper and understandable when Teleglobe was a Crown corporation , but Teleglobe ' s monopoly was extended for another five years after the company was privatized . 
i might note here parenthetically that Stentor has reached an agreement with Teleglobe that assures Teleglobe of 75 per cent of its traffic for two years after the so - called " end of the monopoly . " 
the reason the government gave for the monopoly extensions was to give Teleglobe time to prepare for competition . 
i believe it is fair to say that Teleglobe is no more competitive today , nor prepared for competition , than it was in 1987 . 
what has been accomplished during three monopoly extensions has been the delay of competition in overseas telecommunications , a very happy circumstance for the shareholders , and I do not fault shareholders being rewarded . 
Teleglobe ' s charges are substantially higher than for long - distance calls of equivalent length over the North American telecommunications grid , where competition and choice exist , or for overseas telecommunication calls that are routed via the United States , where competition and choice also exist . 
if you want proof of this statement , you need look no further than a Financial Post article dated January 7 , 1998 . In that article , a senior officer of Teleglobe announced that Teleglobe would drop its tariffs by more than 12 per cent in order to respond to the competition that Teleglobe anticipates will result from the CRTC ' s decision on December 19 last year pertaining to " international switched hubbing . " 
i will return to that decision in just a moment . 
in the U.S. , Teleglobe has been allowed to penetrate the three market segments of carriers , businesses and individual consumers . 
earlier this month , Teleglobe USA Inc. was granted approval by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission to route U.S. calls to Canada through its own network , rather than through circuits leased from U.S. carriers . 
Teleglobe ' s monopoly allows no such competition to Teleglobe in Canada , and Teleglobe has opposed liberalized regulation in Canada assiduously . 
it has , for example , appealed to the CRTC to ban what is called " international switched hubbing , " or ISH , as it is referred to . 
Teleglobe itself does ISH . 
what Teleglobe objects to is when someone leases circuits from Teleglobe and then routes their own customers ' traffic over these circuits . 
ISH is directly analogous to what the pioneers of resale did domestically that ultimately broke up the monopoly in domestic long distance . 
if Teleglobe succeeds in having ISH banned , it will put Canadian - owned companies engaged in this activity out of business . 
Teleglobe was initially successful in convincing the CRTC to ban international switch hubbing , or ISH , although on December 19 last year the CRTC reversed itself and decided to allow it . 
on February 2 , Teleglobe appealed to the CRTC to stay that decision and , at the same time , appealed to the cabinet to rescind or vary the decision or send it back to the CRTC for reconsideration . 
in its petition to the CRTC , Teleglobe asked the CRTC to preserve " Teleglobe ' s status and exclusive mandate . " 
Teleglobe ' s objective appears clear - to preserve its monopoly and postpone competition in overseas telecommunications as long as possible . 
honourable senators , I do not believe that firms need to have monopoly powers in Canada in order to compete abroad . 
i believe they should learn to compete in Canada first . 
i do not believe that Canadian consumers should be required to subsidize Canadian firms for foreign ventures , especially if Canadian consumers are deprived of the benefits of competition and choice that those firms ' foreign consumers have . 
i do not believe we are doing Teleglobe any favours by delaying the judgment day of competition . 
my point in reciting all this background relates to proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) of Bill C - 17 . 
that section requires a licence from the CRTC for anyone who wishes to provide international telecommunications services . 
i should like to understand why the government feels this proposed section is necessary , and to what end the licensing authority will be used . 
what I fear , and what I would be opposed to , is that the proposed section could be used , or is intended to be used , to continue Teleglobe ' s privileged position . 
this could happen by using the powers of proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) to limit or delay competition to Teleglobe either by facilities - based carriers or by resellers . 
the other issue I should like to raise also relates to proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) and to the goals of competition and choice . 
once again , a little history is required . 
in 1994 , the CRTC concluded that increased competition and local telecommunications would be in the public interest . 
in May of last year , the CRTC issued another decision to establish the framework for that competition . 
the May CRTC decision , however , restricted entry into the local market solely to facilities - based carriers - that is , carriers that own fibre optic cable or other transmission facilities . 
under the Telecommunication Act , a facilities - based carrier must be able to meet certain specified Canadian ownership requirements . 
the net effect was that foreign - owned or controlled telecommunication companies were banned from entering the Canadian local telecommunications sector - even those that were already competing as resellers in the Canadian long - distance market or Centrex resell market , and doing so successfully . 
i am advised that this provision could well conflict with our international obligations to open all telecommunications to resale - type competition , in that foreign - owned entities are subject to discrimination relative to Canadian - owned firms . 
we must wonder also if this is the way to ensure the most effective competition in the new telecommunications market and the widest possible choice for consumers in local telecommunications . 
the issue would have been addressed under the proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) originally tabled in the other place . 
however , proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) was amended in the other place , restricting its application to providers of international telecommunication services . 
thus , providers of domestic telecommunications services , which includes local telecommunications services , are not covered . 
the reasons for this amendment in the other place had nothing to do with a local competition issue . 
it appears that the amendment was made with some haste and without consideration of its impact on local competition . 
honourable senators , I suggest to you that the Senate should revisit this issue , as the Senate did so constructively in its pre - study of the Telecommunications Act . 
i put it to this chamber that proposed section 16.1 ( 1 ) , as presented to the Senate , begs a number of serious questions that go to the heart of this government ' s policy on telecommunications . 
efficient , low cost telecommunications , both domestic and overseas , are the keys to our productivity , our competitiveness , and our ability to build a solid economy in the 21 st century . 
experience has shown us that competition and choice help to drive cost effective telecommunications . 
under GATS , Canada has agreed to a liberalized regulatory regime for telecommunications . 
i suggest that Bill C - 17 be looked at in that light . 
will Bill C - 17 lead to liberalization , competition and choice ? 
or does Bill C - 17 contemplate continuation of regulatory barriers to entry by competitors in domestic and overseas telecommunications ? 
when this bill reaches committee stage , I urge a serious review of the matters I have raised today . 
it is to be hoped that we will be able to find some answers . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition : 
honourable senators , before moving the adjournment of the debate in the name of Senator Oliver , I wish to pose a question to Senator Kelly . 
senator Kelly : 
Yes. 
senator Kinsella : 
what does " hubbing " mean ? 
ISH occurs when it uses that facility for re - routing its own customers ' calls . 
in other words , it is a spoke , and Teleglobe remains without competition . 
senator Kinsella : 
senator Kelly : 
essentially , yes . 
i guess our own government made the same mistake . 
we announce a laudable objective and then frustrate that objective by putting in all these caveats and short - term shifts that keep leading back to monopoly . 
senator Kinsella : 
finally , am I correct in understanding that under the WTO a whole process has been put in place that will come to fruition in October , which , in a sense , will overtake the intent of this bill ? 
senator Kelly : 
the best answer that I can give to that question , honourable senators , is that it has that appearance , but there are still too many indications that we are building roadblocks along the path from here to there . 
yes , it should overtake this proposal . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , clearly there is more to this bill than first meets the eye . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Oliver , debate adjourned . 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Gigant è s , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier , for the second reading of Bill C - 18 , to amend the Customs Act and the Criminal Code . 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , try as I might , I was unable to find any compelling reason to oppose this bill . 
they cannot make arrests without warrants . 
there are other things they can do to stop people at the border , but arresting people is not one of them . 
it is felt by most that there are lots of occasions at the border when people coming into our country should be stopped and investigated , possibly under the Criminal Code . 
as the situation exists today , that is not possible . 
this bill has broad support right across the country because of the magnitude of the problem concerning people coming into Canada . 
let us take a look at the magnitude of that problem . 
people are coming into the country when it is believed there may be outstanding warrants that would make them undesirables . 
that is not to say that we are completely happy . 
there are still some questions we would like to have answered : funding for one , training for two . 
it is a very dangerous thing to give customs officers the powers of a peace officer without their knowing what they can do as peace officers that they could not do before , and , of course , in relation to the managing of evidence in a criminal case , and so on . 
aside from those few things , and perhaps others that can be raised in committee , I see no difficulty with the bill and , in fact , I see the opposite : 
it is a good step forward . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. The Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Ron Ghitter rose pursuant to notice of February 10 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution : ( a ) its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; ( b ) alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; ( c ) the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire to see equal numbers of senators representing each province ; ( d ) the length of term of office ; ( e ) the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level ; and ( f ) the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . 
the notice deals with elements of reform of the Senate , and I present it to you in all humility and on the basis of a document that I hope will stand as a possible area for future consideration for this chamber . 
if a vote were to be held today in the province of Alberta as to whether or not to abolish the Senate of Canada , it is my opinion that the majority of Albertans would be in favour of abolition . 
if a vote were to be held today in the province of Alberta as to whether or not to elect senators , it is my opinion that the result would be overwhelmingly in favour of an elected Senate . 
if a poll were to be taken today in the province of Alberta as to the profession or avocation that has the worst reputation , politicians would be low on the list , along with used car salesmen and lawyers , and if there was a category for members of the Senate of Canada , unfortunately , in my opinion , we would be near the very bottom . 
i will not presume to predict the results if such votes or polls were undertaken in other regions of the nation , but I suspect that the results would be similar . 
it is true that Canadians are becoming more cynical about many of the institutions such as our Parliament , our legislatures , our city councils , our court systems , and most of our traditional community leaders . 
it is also true that Canadians suspect their political leaders , for whatever reason , of everything from incompetence to dishonesty , to elitism , to greed . 
our politicians are the favoured targets . 
maybe that was always the case , but today what should be the most valued work in our nation , political service , what should be our highest and most prestigious calling , for many has been relegated to the home of the lowest of the low , the most suspect and the most distrusted . 
it is a serious and an important issue , one that demands reflection , debate and action . 
today my contribution to the inquiry is intended to focus attention on one aspect of the issue , in what I can only describe as the tragedy of the Senate of Canada . 
what has happened to this institution , which was created in 1867 by Sir John A . Macdonald to protect and represent the regions of Canada , and to act as a counterweight to the popularly elected House of Commons ? 
why has the Senate of Canada fallen into such disrepute , to the extent that as recently as Saturday , February 14 , the respected journalist William Thorsell concluded , in his Op - Ed piece in The Globe and Mail , that the Senate should be abolished without prejudice to its reinvention ; or the esteemed observer from Ottawa , Douglas Fisher , in an editorial suggested that there is no purpose for today ' s Senate . 
it is true that the shame brought upon the Senate by the Andrew Thompson farce has acted as a lightning rod , bringing much negative attention to this chamber , but the negative attitudes of Canadians to the Senate were fixed long before the incident about Andrew Thompson . 
the critics have now become more strident and vocal , fed by a sceptical and voracious media , a cynical populace , and a growing demand for " transparency " and " accountability " which are the political buzz words of the autumn of the 20 th century . 
would it be appropriate , in Canada ' s best interests , to abolish the Senate ? 
as an Albertan , I contend that the answer is clearly no . 
for surely my fellow Albertans understand that the basic reasons for the creation of this second chamber are as valid today as they were 130 years ago , if not more so . 
when the city of Toronto sends more MPs to Ottawa than the whole province of Alberta , does that imbalance not cry out for a chamber of regional representation ? 
unfortunately , the same imbalance exists in this chamber , and I will have more to say about that in a moment . 
surely a bicameral system of government , with its checks and balances , is a proven and successful system in a democracy , acting as an effective safety valve from the potential of oppression by the majority . 
i rise in my place today , as a Canadian from a region which strongly believes in the importance of a regional chamber as a fundamental cornerstone of a workable and fair representative democracy . 
so where have we gone wrong ? 
what surgery is required to bring the Canadian Senate back to life in the eyes of Canadians , to be worthy of their confidence ? 
there may be some in this chamber who are of the opinion that a minor face - lift will suffice . 
they may argue in this inquiry - and I hope they do - that this place is basically operating in an appropriate manner . 
i do not share that optimistic and positive view . 
when Canadians are not listening to us , except when we experience Thompson - like controversy ; when there is little recognition of value coming from this place , or at best a begrudging positive but brief accolade , as in the case of Pearson airport , Somalia , the CPP and other such issues , the Senate as an institution is in trouble . 
if there is no acceptance of the worth of this institution , there will be no acceptance of our work . 
much of our committee work and legislative scrutiny which is of value will be destined to gather the dust of disregard and derision . 
this will continue until the required major surgery to this institution is applied . 
there is a sadness about the statements that I have just made . 
it would be comforting and pleasant if I could speak instead of the prestige and positive recognition of the Senate and of my pride in being a senator , but unfortunately that is not the case . 
i see many who have served Canada with distinction in the parliaments and legislatures of this land . 
frankly , I see individuals in this chamber whose experience , education , and personal histories of service to this nation in many cases far outweigh the talents of the membership of the elected House of Commons . 
i would trust the applied wisdom of the membership of this place any day over that of the other place , if only we could apply it on a non - partisan basis and dedicate our considerations with an obligation to the regions from whence we come and to whom we are constitutionally responsible , rather than to the political parties who put us here . 
yet the Senate of Canada , with all of the talents , wisdom , experience , education and public service of its members , flounders somewhere between abolition , purgatory and outright dismissal . 
honourable senators , it is , in my view , time for a reality check . 
it is time to be the agents of change . 
i come before you today as one senator not pretending for a moment to be a self - serving conscience wishing to demean this institution , but rather as a senator who believes in the importance of the Senate , admires those who come here to serve , I hope recognizing the challenges we face for our very existence ; as one senator who wants to rally the dialogue and join in the call to action which I think we must undertake . 
so many in this place are better equipped than I to understand the ailments and prescribe the cure . 
i want to hear from you . 
however , in my few years in this chamber I have not heard this topic debated . 
it is time to do so . 
it is time to fashion a plan of action to redeem this place . 
it is too important an issue to overlook . 
the impetus must come from within . 
it is not enough to cop out and avoid the issue on the grounds that it is beyond our control ; that it is a constitutional issue , as we follow in step with the rhetoric of the day , that after the Meech Lake and Charlottetown accords no one in their right mind would want to tackle a constitutional issue so let us forget about it and worry about it some other time . 
the fact remains that to date we do not represent the regions of Canada . 
we seem to represent the will of the political parties that put us here , rather than our regions . 
if one needs evidence of this fact , one need only look in this chamber to see how we position ourselves - Liberals over there , Conservatives over here . 
should I not be sitting in this chamber with my colleagues from Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba ? 
should it not be that senators from Ontario should sit together to represent Ontario ? 
if we are truly representative of our regions , why are we here representing political parties ? 
why are we here thinking like politicians ? 
we are not supposed to be politicians . 
i refer those who would use such terms to the original discussion with respect to our Constitution and the creation of the Senate which describes why we are here and what our responsibilities really are . 
they will say there is nothing new that we can possibly add to the subject in this debate . 
i suspect that may be true as well . 
they may be right , but what we can do is make a statement of firm commitment to change and create an action plan to see it through . 
before I come to my suggestions , I intend to describe a few of the reasons why , in my opinion , we find ourselves in the position which I have previously submitted . 
fifth , in truth , I doubt that many of our leaders want an effective Senate with regional representation . 
i doubt that our Prime Minister wants this type of Senate because the Senate gives him the power and flexibility to command loyalty and to reward friends . 
as well , I think some members of the Senate do not really want change in this place because they are comfortable here and do not want to rock the boat . 
political movements often use the Senate as their hot button political theme of the day . 
i would recommend that those who come here with their sombreros take them to the other place and play their mariachis for the Prime Minister , who refuses to act . 
i also say to them that in my view it is much more important to press for regional equality in this place in priority to an elected Senate , if they are sincere in their motivations to cause change . 
what can we do ? 
first and foremost , whatever we do , it must be a non - partisan issue for this place . 
we must cast our political allegiances aside and work together in harmony to effect an action plan . 
second , we must reaffirm our support for what I think are some basic principles of change . 
first , the Senate must come forward and decide whether an elected Senate or a more acceptable non - partisan way of selecting members to the Senate is appropriate . 
in this regard , I am of the view that an elected Senate is not the best solution , although it would certainly be better than the way senators are appointed today . 
i prefer an appointment process by a non - partisan tribunal upon the recommendations of the federal government and the premier of the province where the vacancy occurs . 
by electing senators , we would merely be replicating what goes on in the House of Commons with all the political partisanship , and I would like to avoid that in this chamber . 
by electing senators , we would also exclude many outstanding Canadians who would serve if asked , but who are not willing to run for political office . 
many of us have already been there and have had enough of electioneering . 
second , I would recommend equal regional representation by province or the five regions of Canada . 
third , I would suggest that we remove the power of veto from this place and replace it with a reasonable suspensive power . 
fourth , I would recommend that we change the term of office in this place to no more than 10 years . 
it was the recommendation of the joint committee that the term of office here be nine years . 
i do not see any reason why people should be here longer than 10 years , with the greatest respect to those who are working and are here . 
let us make our position clear and then use our influence in a concerted strategy to force the changes to occur . 
let us examine , as we have in the past , ways by which we can make changes from within that will make us more effective . 
the status quo is nearing an end . 
Canadians will not tolerate it much longer . 
the warning signs are everywhere for us to see . 
the status quo means further erosion of this place and diminution of our work . 
the status quo means our work and our efforts will become meaningless and if that is to be the case , we might as well stay home . 
however , we must all certainly agree that the time for action is now , before it is too late . 
let me conclude with a sentence from a letter sent to Senator Poulin that arrived on my desk yesterday morning . 
it ' s the old story of lead or be lead . 
in that , I readily concur . 
senators , I look forward to your contribution to the inquiry . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the 15 - minute speaking period for Honourable Senator Ghitter has concluded . 
is leave granted to extend his time ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Honourable Senator Ghitter : 
if the Senate is to be a non - partisan institution , does that imply that the responsible government approach that we have now in defending bills , answering questions from the opposition , and so on would not be maintained ? 
if we do , is it for only a smaller group of people representing the government or should we forget about responsible government in this place ? 
senator Ghitter : 
honourable senators , when I first came to the Senate , I was amazed that there was a Question Period . 
i asked , " Why do we have a Question Period when no one is listening ? " 
we go through the motions of a Question Period and while it provides for some great dialogue in this chamber , is it really an effective way of communication ? 
we must look at the relevance of that item . 
i am not sure why we do it any more . 
we talk about procedures to get policy into committee and debated and to deal with issues within the regional context . 
however , replicating what is going on in the other house , spending an hour in Question Period when no one is listening , is due for examination as to whether it is good use of our time . 
in this new process of talking about change , it is time we talked about how we can use our time better and how we do things on a regional basis rather than battling for political purposes . 
that is not why we are here . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , Mr. Thorsell , in his commentary which Honourable Senator Ghitter used as his fact base to build an argument , also suggested abolition of the monarchy . 
i doubt if that view would be shared in the country at this time . 
it is certainly not shared by the majority of us on this side . 
as a fact base , Mr. Thorsell does not exactly build the strongest platform upon which I would construct a scaffold to hang myself . 
second , with respect to Douglas Fisher , I hope to address his comments because I have a higher degree of respect for him , although I have consistently disagreed with Mr. Fisher over the years and hope to continue to do so . 
what bothers me about the thrust of Honourable Senator Ghitter ' s argument is the question of conflict . 
perhaps I misheard what was said , however , I understood Senator Ghitter to say that as a member of the Liberal Party I am in a conflict of interest situation as a representative of the region of Ontario . 
i do not believe that . 
i believe that when senators speak for their region they speak without conflict . 
i know that when former Senator MacEachen spoke , or when Senator Murray or Senator Stewart speak for their particular regions , I hear different approaches but I hear one particular view . 
i find it difficult to accept the thrust of Senator Ghitter ' s argument . 
perhaps he might respond as to whether I have a conflict by being a Liberal and a senator representing the region and my particular area . 
i do not find that . 
i think back to every issue that I have had to deal with in this house and with rare exception have I put my party posture before my views . 
as late as yesterday I gave views which were different from that of the government . 
senator Ghitter : 
i hear it all the time . 
with respect to conflict , it never entered my mind that there is a conflict . 
what did enter my mind , and I have not been here as long as Senator Grafstein , is the many occasions when the whips were out and senators have said to me , " I would not vote this 
way , but my party wants me to vote this way . " 
i do not know if that means region first or party first . 
i may be na ï ve , but I have been here through many debates when the phones were ringing and people were brought in and voted the party line . 
if you are telling me that does not happen , fair enough , but I do not accept that . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , when I came to the Senate , I knew I was not joining the most popular club in Canada . 
my question to Senator Ghitter is a follow - up to Senator Nolin ' s question who addressed the exact point . 
our speaker , Senator Molgat , was involved for many years in the first constitutional debate across Canada . 
we had good suggestions for the Senate . 
therefore , it is neither 10 years nor nine years . 
we went all across Canada in 1970 - 71 , and I was a member under his chairmanship at that time , listening to Canadian points of view . 
i am glad that you say we should perhaps sit by regions . 
you mentioned five regions . 
it is something that I think I could sell everywhere , including in Quebec , except I am not sure you could sell that concept to your fourth region , which would be Saskatchewan , Manitoba and Alberta . 
for me , B.C. should be a region . 
you will have to help me out in my reflection on that . 
if you can sell that concept in Manitoba and Alberta , I will be more than happy to agree that there are now five regions . 
there would be , let us say , 100 senators . 
the second point which I would really like to debate with you is exactly what Senator Nolin has asked you . 
i love logic , a compulsory subject during my classical studies . 
on the one hand , you are saying in your response to Senator Nolin , that no , we ought not to respond to what is going on in the House of Commons , that we do not need leadership , that there would be no legislation . 
then , on the other hand , you have said that we would have to abandon our right to veto , which strikes me as a contradiction . 
abandon the right to veto what ? 
legislation originating from the House , there I would be in agreement . 
but who would introduce legislation in the House ? 
senator Nolin has raised this point . 
what about the very few who are chosen who will let us know what is going on on the other side ? 
i see now that we will have a lot of work ahead of us , to paraphrase a famous quote of Mr. Chr é tien . 
i do agree with much of what you said , but I will be very active . 
in the last two months , I have taken the time to write about my views on what the Senate could be . 
i took all the views of Canadians and I should like to debate with you every single point put forward by those who call for equal representation of provinces . 
i think Canadians should be well informed and I hope you will join with me to inform Canadians on just what having an elected Senate means . 
what do you think an elected senator from Ontario would say ? 
at this point in time , people who talk about the Senate always come up with the same comment . 
well , I made a study . 
an elected Senate would cost between $ 160 million and $ 200 million . 
if Canadians are ready for that , that is fine , but they must be told . 
i think our task will be to analyze everything that is said pro and contra , then come up with an answer and say , " You are the boss , taxpayers . 
you are the ones ultimately who will decide , not the scholars and the constitutional experts , " with all due respect to my friend . 
people must know what exactly we are talking about when they are told that it costs too much . 
if you say , " Abolish it , " that would be the simplest reform . 
i would like you to reflect and give me your views . 
when people say that we should abolish the Senate , I say , " Yes , but can you sell that idea ? " 
if you abolish the Senate , you will have only one house , and you will then need to have proportional representation . 
are you telling me that the Atlantic provinces are ready to go from 32 to what they should be , which is no more than 21 ? 
are you telling me that Saskatchewan and Manitoba are ready , under proportional representation , to go down to ten and 11 , and not be protected by the grandfather clause ? 
if that is to be the case , then who would be taking seats away from British Columbia and Alberta ? 
it would not be Quebec ; it would be Saskatchewan and Manitoba , who now have seven senators . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Prud ' homme : 
no , honourable senators . 
senator Ghitter : 
i do not have the answer to the honourable senator ' s question , or to Senator Nolin ' s question , but those procedures could be worked out . 
again , there is nothing new under the sun . 
certainly , Senate reform is not new , but the matters you raise warrant discussion . 
i hope we will have that discussion here and come to a consensus . 
as a next step , I intend to present some notices of motion to the Senate for more specific consideration after we deal with this inquiry and hear some more debate on it . 
senator Nolin : 
honourable senators , I want to make sure that I understood the honourable senator correctly . 
when I asked about responsible government , he did not say that there would be no legislation introduced in this place . 
senator Ghitter : 
No. 
senator Nolin : 
we will need to invent some sort of process by which smaller groups of colleagues could bring that legislation forward and defend it . 
senator Ghitter : 
exactly . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson rose pursuant to notice of February 12 , 1998 : 
that she will call the attention of the Senate to its lack of full accessibility to Canadians with disabilities , and to a means for dealing with disability issues . 
i am not sure how to approach this topic again . 
i suppose the core value of Canadian society is the belief in the equality of our citizens . 
it is the commitment to equality while recognizing diversity that moves Canadians to think big , and to do great things which make a difference in individual lives . 
it is in this context that I wish to speak with you today . 
the purpose of my notice of inquiry is to call the attention of honourable senators to a number of obstacles to full participation in the life of the Senate by Canadians with disabilities , and to suggest a strategy to help improve the situation . 
point of Order 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
we meet early on Wednesday in order to adjourn about three o ' clock for committee meetings . 
has that rule been set aside ? 
senator Berntson : 
that was never a rule . 
senator Stewart : 
has that understanding been set aside ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it used to be a rule when we were on your side . 
senator Stewart : 
i understand that . 
you are quite correct . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I do not think the point that Senator Stewart is raising is a point of order . 
the Senate is in session . 
we have an Order Paper . 
we are very close to the end of that Order Paper . 
there is an understanding from which the Deputy Leader of the Government and Deputy Leader of the Opposition try to work , and today is a short day in that understanding . 
we will be out of here , I would suggest , in about ten minutes . 
we are close to the end . 
as far as the point of order is concerned , the Senate is in session . 
we are under no house rule until we complete our Order Paper . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have no authority to stop the debate . 
please continue , Senator Robertson . 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
as I was saying , honourable senators , I am suggesting a strategy to deal with Canadians with disabilities which may help to improve the situation . 
to set the scene , let me pose a simple question : 
what do Monet , Milton , Beethoven and Roosevelt have in common ? 
Monet , the French impressionist , painted some of his best works with his eyesight failing . 
similarly , John Milton , the English poet , wrote some of his greatest poetry after his eyesight failed . 
Beethoven composed some of his greatest music , including his later string quartets , after his hearing had failed ; and President Roosevelt led the United States out of the Great Depression and through World War II practically from a wheelchair . 
few remember these great people for their disabilities ; most remember their historic contributions , which have transcended their times and enriched our society and , indeed , our civilization . 
in a more modest sense , perhaps , that is why honourable senators agreed to be summoned to this chamber . 
we do not aspire to be artists or writers or composers or presidents , but we do aspire to work for the enrichment of our country and for a greater Canadian society . 
honourable senators , we acknowledge the right of disabled persons to live in a Canada that promotes and protects equality , that encourages self - reliance and independence , and that provides the opportunities for full participation in civic and community affairs . 
as a Canadian society , we place high value on the economic and social contributions of each individual , and we are committed to removing obstacles that limit individual participation and contribution . 
in Canada , we have made great strides since the 1981 International Year of Disabled Persons . 
spirited advocacy has resulted in strategies for change that are based on partnerships that reflect the entire social fabric of our society . 
the fact is that progress in the field of disability is only achieved when partisanship and paternalism have no place . 
real progress is achieved through partnerships based on shared values , and a common commitment to a plan of action . 
what does this mean for the Parliament of Canada and therefore the Senate ? 
let me quote from a report entitled " Access Today . " 
for some people , the Parliament of Canada is seen as a magnificent cluster of historic buildings on a bluff overlooking the Ottawa River . 
for others , if is a forum where citizens ' representatives determine the direction our nation takes . 
still others see Parliament as a governing institution which reflects the values shared by Canadians across the land . 
i believe Parliament is all of this , and then some . 
parliament , by its actions , protects our individual and collective rights , and gives meaning to the concept of equality for all . 
this statement prefaces a 1993 report which reviewed initiatives undertaken by the House of Commons , or the other place , to serve Canadians with disabilities . 
it underscored the value of equality and provided an objective for the other place for their strategy of change . 
while the other place has done a great deal of pioneering work in serving disabled persons , particularly in the areas of physical access , public information , employment policy and practices , that is not to say that the Senate has not also made some progress in serving the special needs community . 
a great deal of progress has been achieved in improving physical access to the Senate ' s facilities . 
as well , Human Resource officials are working on a policy and a program to address employment equity issues and investigate the possibility of enabling hearing impaired Canadians to access the Senate ' s 1 - 800 line . 
however , despite this real progress , honourable senators cannot , and should not , expect the Senate ' s officials and staff to carry the ball by themselves without the full support and direction of the chamber . 
the fact of the matter is that over four million people - 15.8 per cent - live with disabilities in our country . 
in a very real sense , these citizens are faced with some big obstacles to full participation in the Senate ' s activities - either as a senator , as an employee of the Senate , as a visitor to the Senate , as a witness at a committee , or as a Canadian simply looking for information on the Senate . 
barriers to accessibility take many forms . 
can he do this when accessibility to senator ' s desks is nearly impossible ? 
we have noticed the difficulties in this respect experienced by one of our colleagues . 
it is a great effort for him to get into this chamber . 
can he do this when documents and Senate publications are not available to persons with visual impairments ? 
if people cannot read what we are doing , how will they know what is going on , and how will they participate ? 
some believe that section 13 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms , which prohibits discrimination on the grounds of disability , opens the Senate to the charge of discrimination , especially because of its lack of accessibility . 
others believe that heritage issues must be weighed in addressing physical access , thus making it difficult to balance heritage considerations against physical accessibility considerations . 
that is a situation which surely will continue should we continue to take things for granted . 
on the other hand , would they want us , instead , to become more proactive and develop a strategy for change that will continue us along the path to achieving equality for all ? 
i think , honourable senators , the answer is obvious . 
the reality , it seems it me , is that the timing is perfect . 
the long - term project to renovate the Parliament buildings will provide the opportunity to make certain changes that will ensure better physical accessibility . 
officials from the Department of Public Works , the House of Commons , the Senate and the Library of Parliament must be encouraged to ensure that the needs of disabled Canadians are met . 
that is why today I am proposing a unique initiative for the Senate on the disability issue . 
it is an initiative that is timely , relevant and affordable . 
over the past three months , I have discussed the idea of Senate leadership on the disability issue with several colleagues from both the government and the opposition . 
senate Doyle , over the years , has constantly pressed for enlightened action on this important issue . 
i discussed my concerns with the new chair of the committee . 
today I wish to propose a specific process that should enable the Senate to make up for any lost time by arriving at a coherent plan to deal with disability issues . 
the process involves three simple steps . 
step 1 : 
invite the Clerk of the Senate to establish a special committee of officials with a mandate to review the capacity of the Senate to provide services to Canadians with disabilities . 
in other words , take an inventory . 
step 2 : 
provide to this special committee a group of Canadians with disabilities who would be prepared to offer voluntary advisory services . 
there are many disabled people out there , just waiting to be asked . 
step 3 : 
develop a comprehensive action plan , including priorities , time lines and costing , which will take into account various fiscal realities while signalling the Senate ' s commitment to work toward " equality for all . " 
such a special committee of officials could be encouraged to work with the House of Commons officials on common access issues while ensuring the Senate ' s jurisdictional distinctiveness . 
i believe this process has considerable merit , and could proceed with dispatch under the guidance of either the Internal Economy Committee or the Rules Committee . 
honourable senators , I repeat that it is an opportune time for the Senate to act now . 
by acting now , the Senate might give new meaning to the concept of full accessibility , employment equity , and dignity for marginalized people . 
at the beginning of my remarks , I noted the achievements of President Roosevelt . 
i am sure honourable senators will watch with interest the Prime Minister ' s visit to the United Nations in New York on March 2 . 
he is there to receive the Franklin Delano Roosevelt award far outstanding achievements in the field of disability . 
the Prime Minister will accept this award on behalf of all Canadians , including the previous administration , which worked so hard throughout the years to make Canada the most accessible country in the world . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 41 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
visitors in the Gallery 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
blood Donor Clinic 
literacy Action Day 
fifth Annual Advocacy Meeting on Parliament Hill 
port of Saint John , New Brunswick 
this Year ' s Success Story 
united Nations 
mission of Secretary - General to Baghdad , Iraq 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
report on Section 59 of the Parliament of Canada Act Presented and Adopted 
status of Senator Andrew Thompson - Fourth Report of Committee Presented 
adjournment 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
committee Authorized to MeetDuring Sitting of the Senate 
question PERIOD 
Iraq 
uncovering of Caches of Weapons of Mass Destruction - Air Strikes versus Activities of UN Arms Inspection Teams - Government Position 
national Defence 
out - of - Date Equipment , Clothing and Materiel in use by Armed Forces - Government Position 
possible Strike on Iraq by Western Nations - Operational Status of Sea King Helicopters 
possible Strike on Iraq by Western Nations - Operational Status of Sea King Helicopters 
human Resources Development 
changes to Canada Pension Plan - Location of Investment Board - Government Position 
science , Research and Development 
cuts to Budgets of Research Institutions - Effect on Post - Doctoral Fellows - Possible Reversal of Policy in Upcoming Budget - Government Position 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Prince Rupert Port Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Public Works and Government Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Veteran Affairs - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Western Economic Diversification - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
orders OF THE DAY 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
status of Senator Thompson - Fourth Report of Committee Adopted on Division 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
tenth Report of Committee Presented and Adopted 
eleventh Report of Committee Presented and Adopted 
business of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
welcome to our Senate chambers . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
blood Donor Clinic 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , I should like to take a couple of minutes to talk about the kind of people we have around us here in the Senate , fine men and women who work as support staff and on security . 
i would not go so far as to say that they are the very best that there is in the workforce today , but they are certainly equal to the very best . 
for instance , last November , the staff here in the Senate organized the sixth annual United Way fund - raising bowling tournament which was held in Hull . 
it was a lot of fun and , unlike other departments in this fund - raising effort that had trouble meeting their goals , the Senate exceeded its goal by 50 per cent . 
in addition , I recall a few years ago when we had a tragic fire in Gatineau . 
an apartment building burnt to the ground , leaving many homeless . 
many were single mothers . 
the Senate mobilized its characteristic charitable motives and , in days , collected money , food and furniture , which was all much appreciated by the victims of this tragic event . 
many people have given generously of their time , talents and money to many worthy causes , from literacy to learning disabilities , to street kids , to the world - famous Heart Institute here in Ottawa . 
these activities enjoy their support , not for the glory or for the recognition , but because it is in their hearts . 
this volunteerism embodies what they are and who they are . 
blood ? 
well , in a manner of speaking , yes . 
we have all read and heard recently about surgeries having to be cancelled for lack of blood . 
we have all read and heard , given the publicity that has gone on lately , about the blood collection and distribution situation in Canada , and that there is an increased reluctance to give blood . 
this gives us one more chance to try to make a difference . 
i have talked with my colleague the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
we agreed that we would make this announcement today , although we did not do the work . 
the work has been done , once again , by people in security , people on our respective staffs , people to whom we are related , and so on . 
the culmination of all of this is that on April 2 , in the Aboriginal Peoples ' Room , a blood donor ' s clinic will be held . 
we have high expectations , and I know they will be met . 
i wish to say thank you to all of the people who have worked at organizing this particular event . 
i want to encourage all of my colleagues to roll up their sleeves and make a contribution on April 2 . 
as the communication strategy unfolds , I want particularly to make this one of the most successful blood donor clinics . 
i would invite people from the Library of Parliament , from the House of Commons , and , indeed , everyone within hearing distance to participate as well . 
we want to make this event a huge success . 
as time goes on and we get closer to the date , I should like to give suitable recognition to those who have put it together and worked so hard behind the scenes , but have never been recognized for any of their efforts . 
i will do that at some later time . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I mean to speak briefly on another topic , but if I have any blood left by April 2 , I will be happy to be a donor at that time as well . 
literacy Action Day 
fifth Annual Advocacy Meeting on Parliament Hill 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i want to bring to the attention of honourable senators the importance of literacy . 
i know you will all agree that , thanks to the Herculean efforts of the former leader of the government - my colleague who now sits to my left - we have been reminded on a daily , weekly and sometimes hourly basis of the importance of literacy in our communities and in our country . 
in that respect , we owe a huge debt of gratitude to Senator Fairbairn . 
today on Parliament Hill , over 50 volunteer tutors , adult learners and literacy professionals are meeting with members of the House of Commons and senators to help them better appreciate the role of literacy and lifelong learning in all our lives . 
six national groups are participating in the effort . 
they are the Movement for Canadian Literacy , ABC Canada , Frontier College , F é d é ration canadienne pour l ' alphab é tisation en fran ç ais , the National Adult Literacy Database and Laubach Literacy of Canada . 
together , these groups will ensure that literacy remains a top priority for the Government of Canada , for all parliamentarians , and indeed for all Canadians . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish to congratulate those who are leading the charge on the literacy front , for all of those in our midst today and , most particularly , to our colleague Senator Fairbairn . 
[ later ] 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I could not miss the opportunity to thank my colleague and the Leader of the Government in the Senate , Senator Graham , for so generously recognizing the Fifth Annual Literacy Action Day on Parliament Hill and the truly remarkable work that has been done by a group of people , some of them sitting in the gallery today , who have , in a sense , turned the tables on Parliament . 
instead of Parliament taking a message to the people , the people , through these advocates , have brought a very important message to all of us on Parliament Hill . 
basically , the message is to try and focus , in everything we do , on the fundamental imperative of basic literacy skills in the daily lives of citizens in this country . 
all of us know , if we think about it for a minute , that we could not get through a day in this place without the full utilization of the reading , writing and numeracy skills that millions of Canadians - more than 40 per cent of our adult population - have difficulty with . 
in their advocacy on Parliament Hill today , these campaigners , learners and teachers are delivering to parliamentarians a very important message as well . 
literacy goes to the very heart of our democratic process , and millions of Canadians are disenfranchised because of it . 
all of our fine speeches and all of our policy pronouncements count for nothing unless Canadians can understand and read what we have to say . 
the final point , honourable senators , is that Canadians must understand that potentially more than 7 million people will not go near a polling station during the next federal election because they will not know where it is , and they will not know how to mark a ballot . 
this is a democratic country , one of the greatest in the world . 
literacy should be one of the fundamental issues for everyone who wishes to serve it . 
i thank my friends from the bottom of my heart . 
port of Saint John , New Brunswick 
this Year ' s Success Story 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I wish to share with you a Saint John , New Brunswick , success story . 
last year , 1997 , was another record year for the Port of Saint John . 
in terms of volume , Saint John remains eastern Canada ' s busiest port . 
twenty - one million tonnes of goods passed through our port last year , compared with the Port of Halifax , which handled over 13 million tonnes , and Montreal ' s port , which handled over 19 million tonnes . 
thousands of direct and indirect jobs are generated by our city ' s port , and millions of dollars of activity have come to Saint John as a result of our port community . 
recent improvements to the port ' s operations have enabled us to become one of the eastern seaboard ' s most competitive ports , with business increasing every year . 
part of this increase comes from the introduction of a new stop last November , the only one in Canada , for goods destined to the Middle and Far East . 
another factor is the commitment of the export and tourist businesses in Saint John to work together for their local port to build a lasting relationship . 
all those connected to the port claim that this success story is a result of the port ' s excellent employee team . 
this team has a lot to be proud of . 
Atlantic Progress Magazine ranks the Port of Saint John as one of Eastern Canada ' s top Crown corporations and as the best Atlantic port . 
the American Association of Port Authorities also named the Port of Saint John as its 1997 Award of Excellence winner in the category of communications for their inspiring advertisement entitled " A Banner Year . " 
my congratulations are extended to the board of directors , the managers and workers of this efficient and cost - effective operation , for as the port grows , so does the economy of the whole of my home city . 
united Nations 
mission of Secretary - General to Baghdad , Iraq 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , today , as we know , the Secretary - General of the United Nations is on one of the most important missions upon which a Secretary - General of that organization has ever embarked . 
i would not want the day to pass in this chamber without wishing him well , because failure is not a very attractive option for either the world community or , in particular , the communities of peoples who live close to the sites that might be bombed should there be failure . 
we have expressed our concern here in the past 10 days that we lack data on the risk analysis associated with the fallout of bombing , from whatever altitude , sites containing biological or chemical materials and the impact the release of those materials would have upon the Iraqi and other communities nearby . 
honourable senators , I am sure that you will join with me in prayers and hope that the Secretary - General of the United Nations will have a very successful mission to Baghdad . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
report on Section 59 of the Parliament of Canada Act Presented and Adopted 
hon. Shirley Maheu , Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
the Senate or the House of Commons may make regulations , by rule or by order , rendering more stringent on its own members the provisions of this Act that relate to the attendance of members or to the deductions to be made from sessional allowances . 
your Committee recommends : 
( a ) that the Senate , pursuant to section 59 of the Parliament of Canada Act , make the Senate Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations in the form attached ; 
( b ) that section 1 of the Senate Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations be adopted as Rule 137 of the Rules of the Senate ; and 
( c ) that the Clerk be instructed to transmit copies in both official languages of the Senate Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations to the Clerk of the Privy Council for registration and publication under the Statutory Instruments Act . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Maheu : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( g ) , I move that the report be adopted now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
senator Maheu : 
honourable senators , I have received a letter and I should like to put it on the record . 
it reads : 
enclosed please find a copy of a letter from the Department of Justice enclosing two stamped copies , in each official language , of the Senate Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations , and advising that the instrument has been examined in accordance with the Statutory Instruments Act . 
it would be appropriate to so advise the Senate when you speak to the report of your Committee that recommends the adoption of the regulations . 
should the Senate adopt the report , the Regulations will be immediately presented for registration under the Statutory Instruments Act , will come into force on registration and will be published in the Canada Gazette . 
it is signed by our Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel , Mark Audcent . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
there is a request for the circulation of the letter . 
that will be arranged . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I wish to raise a question of procedure . 
recommendation ( b ) reads : 
that section 1 of the Senate Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations be adopted as Rule 137 of the Rules of the Senate ; 
our rules also state , under 57 : 
( 1 ) Two days ' notice shall be given of any of the following motions : 
( a ) to make a new rule or to repeal or amend an existing rule ; 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that when leave was granted it was understood that the underlying rules were also suspended with that leave . 
my understanding of the situation is that the Senate gave leave . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
no , Your Honour , that is certainly not the understanding . 
you could read much into that suggestion . 
in that event , giving leave suspends just about everything . 
this rule very categorical indeed , and if we want to adopt the report now , I believe a motion must be brought forward , unless our table officers , with their expertise , are of a contrary mind , suspending or ignoring rule 57 ( 1 ) . 
there is no implication here that we can do that . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
will the honourable senator provide the Senate with an explication of the committee ' s view of rule 57 ( 1 ) of the Rules of the Senate ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , instead of taking this under advisement and checking the rules and precedents , a simple solution might be to ask whether there is leave to suspend that rule . 
if there is leave to suspend that rule , we may proceed with the discussion . 
is leave granted , honourable senators , to suspend rule 57 ( 1 ) ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak on the motion for the adoption of the report ? 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I wish to ask a question of the chairman of the committee . 
i have quickly read the report , which includes the recommendation that there be a change in our rules and , indeed , that the Governor in Council make a new regulation under the Parliament of Canada Act to provide for situations where the Senate suspends one of its members from the service of the Senate , et cetera . 
i understand the import and effect of that . 
that will apply to us all in the future . 
is there another shoe about to drop ? 
what is the committee doing about the particular case of our colleague Senator Thompson ? 
senator Maheu : 
i have another report that I will be presenting in a few moments . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I will call for the vote . 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted 
status of Senator Andrew Thompson - Fourth Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Shirley Maheu , Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has the honour to present its 
fourth REPORT 
pursuant to its order of reference of December 16 , 1997 , your Committee has considered the matter of Senator Andrew Thompson ' s continuing absence for the purposes of determining whether his absence constitutes a contempt of the Senate . 
your Committee met on Tuesday , February 10 , 1998 , and presented its Second Report to the Senate on Wednesday , February 11 , 1998 , requesting an order of the Senate that he appear before the Committee at its next scheduled meeting . 
on February 11 , 1998 , the Senate adopted an order requiring Senator Thompson to appear before the Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders Committee on Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , at 7:00 p.m. in Room 160 - S . 
on Thursday , February 12 , 1998 , the Senate adopted an order directing your Committee to take into consideration the Senate debate of February 11 , and its interim report , particularly with respect to the amendment that was moved ; and that your Committee be authorized to obtain further advice of legal counsel in the matter of the power of the Senate to expel , suspend or otherwise deprive Senator Thompson of his seat in the Senate , and the ability to withhold Senator Thompson ' s sessional indemnity and expense allowance , whatever his current status as a member of the Senate . 
your Committee met at 7:00 p.m. on Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 . After careful consideration of all the facts , and of the legal and procedural advice that it has received , your Committee recommends : 
that the Honourable Senator Andrew Thompson be found in contempt ; 
2 . That , since your Committee finds Senator Thompson in contempt , he be suspended for the remainder of the session ; and 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken to consideration ? 
senator Maheu : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Honourable Senator Maheu . 
senator Maheu : 
that is right , Senator Prud ' homme , later on this day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is . 
on motion of Senator Maheu , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration later this day . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday next , February 24 , 1998 at two o ' clock in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , February 24 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to sit at 3:15 p.m. , Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
committee Authorized to MeetDuring Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , I move : 
that the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. today , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
question PERIOD 
Iraq 
uncovering of Caches of Weapons of Mass Destruction - Air Strikes versus Activities of UN Arms Inspection Teams - Government Position 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , in a press release announcing that Canada would contribute to the military action against Iraq , it is stated that the purpose of the military action is to substantially diminish Iraq ' s capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction and to weaken its ability to attack neighbouring countries . 
two days ago , President Clinton said pretty much the same thing : 
we want to seriously diminish the threat posed by Iraq ' s weapons of mass destruction . 
we want to seriously reduce his ability to threaten his neighbours . 
my question is prompted by the fact that I am puzzled by the use of the words " substantially " and " seriously , " because they imply to me that reducing to an unknown quantity the amount of chemical and biological weapons will eliminate , or at least lessen , the threat of those that remain . 
so far , United Nations inspection teams have tracked down tonnes of weapons in that category across thousands of square miles of the Iraqi desert , and these have been destroyed . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate explain how intense air strikes - and if by " intense " one means an average of one sortie every 30 seconds as during the Gulf War - are a better substitute for arms inspection teams , particularly as during the Gulf War , by the Pentagon ' s own admission , 70 per cent of the bombing sorties missed their target , and an untold number of civilians were killed because of this ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I wish I could guarantee , as I am sure Prime Minister Chr é tien and President Clinton , Prime Minister Blair and all the other world leaders would wish to guarantee , 100 per cent success . 
when they talk about " substantial " they mean substantial . 
i do not believe it would be possible to totally eradicate , however desirable that might be , those terrible weapons of mass destruction that are now available in that country . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is a standard answer which shows that the strategy being developed may lead to some repercussions and reactions which no one seems to be taking into consideration . 
not so long ago , the President said that the United Nations inspection teams , and I quote him : 
... must be able to proceed with their work without interference , to find , to destroy , to prevent Iraq from rebuilding nuclear , chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to carry them . 
if the Government of Canada shares this objective , does the Leader of the Government not agree that it will be an impossible standard to meet , that is to have UN armed inspectors on the ground after the air strikes ? 
it is obvious that Iraq will not allow arms inspectors in the field if we decide to bomb the living daylights out of them . 
it is questionable to think that we will achieve air strikes with the ability to meet proposed objectives . 
the arms inspection teams , despite the limitations placed on them , have had reasonable success . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I leave it to the experts in the field to determine what should be done at any given time . 
as my honourable friend knows , and as was mentioned by Senator Kinsella earlier , UN Secretary - General Kofi Annan is leaving for Paris today . 
he is flying to Baghdad tomorrow . 
he will brief the Security Council on the outcome of his trip on February 24 , Tuesday of next week . 
i should point out that the Secretary - General briefed the full Security Council yesterday for the first time . 
he received unanimous support from those representatives for his trip to Baghdad . 
it is also worth noting that the five permanent members provided oral advice to the Secretary - General that he had to obtain what was termed " full , unconditional and unfettered access to all sites , and compliance with all UN resolutions . " 
the Secretary - General agreed that if Iraq violated whatever deal was struck with the Secretary General , Iraq would suffer the severest consequences . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , my final question is with regard to the Secretary - General ' s visit , and , I hope , successful mission to Baghdad . 
the United States has made it clear that while they have given approval for his visit , they are reserving judgment on the results of it . 
the Secretary - General has gone to Iraq to seek out a compromise , to try and determine if , by a mild watering down of the resolutions , some kind of agreement can be reached . 
the way the United States is presenting their argument , they will not allow one comma of the resolutions to be changed . 
does the Government of Canada believe that nothing should be allowed to interfere with the core work of the inspectors , as the United States is suggesting , or would it accept an accommodation acceptable to Iraq which would avoid the need to resort to air strikes ? 
how far is Canada willing to go to accommodate Iraq , at the risk of offending the United States , and avoid air strikes ? 
more and more , military specialists are warning us that air strikes will not meet the objective of absolute destruction or elimination of biological and chemical weapons . 
in addition , there is the possibility of countless civilians , who are already suffering greatly under economic sanctions , being killed . 
how far will Canada follow the United States in its rigid policy towards Iraq , knowing that if negotiations result in the bombing strategy , we will be party with other allies in the killing of innocent civilians without the objective of the bombings being met ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am sure that citizens of the world will join me in hoping that the Secretary - General ' s mission will be successful . 
the Government of Canada strongly prefers a diplomatic solution . 
however , if force becomes necessary , Canada cannot under any circumstances stand on the sidelines . 
if military action becomes necessary , the objective would be to thwart Iraq ' s capacity to attack its neighbours with weapons of mass destruction . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they will do it anyway . 
senator Graham : 
i wish to point out to honourable senators that Canada is not alone . 
this process began with the United States , then Canada , then the United Kingdom . 
as of today others are considering their support as well . 
national Defence 
out - of - Date Equipment , Clothing and Materiel in use by Armed Forces - Government Position 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government . 
today ' s Ottawa Sun printed an article in which reference was made to a clothing drive to send second - hand or used combat clothes to soldiers going overseas to Bosnia . 
this summer , troops showed up for training with taped combat boots . 
our pilots are flying Sea King helicopters 30 - plus years old . 
our submariners go to sea in obsolete submarines , and our soldiers go into action with second - hand clothing and combat boots which have been taped together . 
are these the multipurpose combat - capable forces that this Liberal government promised in its 1994 white paper on defence ? 
hon. C . William Doody : 
as a supplementary , honourable senators , what form of transportation does the Prime Minister use when he is flying around the countryside as compared to our airmen and soldiers ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the type of transportation that the Prime Minister of today flies in compared to his predecessor is common knowledge . 
with respect to the kind of equipment , apparel or clothing that our troops have or are wearing at the present time , I am sure that the senator ' s description would be the exception rather than the rule . 
the objective of the government , indeed those in charge of the armed forces , is that our forces be provided with the most current equipment possible . 
i understand what the senator is saying with respect to the helicopters . 
we have already announced the replacement with respect to the 15 helicopters . 
the replacements are taking place and I am sure that the other helicopters that are being considered will be on order in the not - too - distant future . 
possible Strike on Iraq by Western Nations - Operational Status of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , as a supplementary , we know that HMCS Toronto is on its way to the gulf area . 
we are told that it has a Sea King helicopter on board . 
we are also told that 30 hours of maintenance is required for every hour of flight time on a Sea King helicopter . 
while HMCS Toronto is a very capable ship , the technology on board the ship was designed in conjunction with the ability of the assigned helicopter . 
we have one helicopter over there that could fall out of the sky at any minute . 
at the least , it needs 30 hours maintenance for each hour of flight . 
is there any contingency plan to keep this ship to its fighting potential in the event that the Sea King is incapable of carrying out its duty ? 
do we have any arrangement with the Americans to put one of their helicopters on the ship ? 
is HMCS Toronto going to be left on the high seas so it does not get in the way ? 
is this another embarrassment in the making for Canada ' s military ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should hope that the Sea King that is operating in conjunction with the HMCS Toronto is fully operational and would be maintained at the high level expected of it . 
as to whether or not a replacement would be available , I am sure that our allies would take that into account . 
we are responding to this difficult situation in the Middle East as requested by our friend and ally , the United States of America . 
by way of information , I should say that the HMCS Toronto is steaming towards the Gulf , and by now is exiting the Suez Canal . 
it is expected in the Strait of Hormuz on February 27 . 
possible Strike on Iraq by Western Nations - Operational Status of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , we now have a situation where we have no money to pay our soldiers , no money for clothing , no money for ammunition , and not enough lead time planned to inoculate our personnel who are moving into harm ' s way in the Gulf . 
in light of all these deficiencies , how can the Government of Canada possibly defend the position that it took on the EH - 101 helicopter , literally blowing a half billion dollars or more ? 
not even an order has been put in yet for a sea - borne helicopter . 
how can the government possibly justify this kind of behaviour ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure that the Honourable Senator Berntson would recognize that , rather than blowing that money , the Government of Canada has saved millions of dollars in the way in which it has selected the modified EH - 101 helicopters . 
with respect to the inoculations suggested by Honourable Senator Berntson , I am sure that we would not want to alarm the Canadian public unduly or unnecessarily . 
i was told personally by the Minister of National Defence on Tuesday that with respect to inoculations and antibiotics , he had been assured by the medical authorities in the Canadian Armed Forces that our personnel would be protected in every way possible . 
human Resources Development 
changes to Canada Pension Plan - Location of Investment Board - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question pertains to the proposed changes to the Canada Pension Plan . 
as you know , the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce is travelling the regions of the country , studying the accountability and make - up of the Investment Board . 
out in the regions , questions are arising as to how that board should invest its money . 
in the west particularly , there are questions regarding why the board would not ensure that investment is made in the regions . 
the fear of westerners is that if the board is centred in Toronto , investments will only be made in the large corporations in Canada . 
as honourable senators are aware , 80 per cent of the investments are to be made in Canada . 
the other question that has arisen is whether the government has given any consideration to locating the head office of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board outside of Ottawa or Toronto - in British Columbia , for example , or on the Prairies or in Atlantic Canada ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators will know that the Banking Committee is doing very useful work , as agreed to by the Minister of Finance when the Senate was considering Bill C - 2 , the Canada Pension Plan bill . 
the board which will be handling investments , as has been indicated on several occasions in responding to other honourable senators , will be at arm ' s length from the government . 
with respect to the location of the headquarters of that board , I can think of a perfectly logical place to locate it , and that would be some place on the island of Cape Breton . 
senator Stratton : 
somehow , I knew I would get that answer . 
if I were from there , I would want it there as well . 
i am from Winnipeg so I want the office placed in Winnipeg . 
i am certain that every member of this place from outside of Toronto or Ottawa would want it to be located in his or her region . 
since much of the money will come from the regions , some consideration should be given to locating the headquarters outside of Toronto or Ottawa . 
senator Graham : 
that is a fair statement . 
i would even broaden the location of the headquarters from Cape Breton to any place in Nova Scotia . 
science , Research and Development 
cuts to Budgets of Research Institutions - Effect on Post - Doctoral Fellows - Possible Reversal of Policy in Upcoming Budget - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , another piece of evidence of this country ' s neglect of science and scientific research was presented recently in Philadelphia at a meeting of the AAAS , the American Association for the Advancement of Science . 
a survey of 3,000 Canadian post - doctoral fellows found that while they do most of the actual work in our research labs , they are underpaid , overworked and worried about their future . 
they are our best , highly - trained minds . 
this year , our Medical Research Council , for example , can spend $ 8 for every Canadian , while its U.S. counterpart is spending about $ 66 for every American . 
second , what is his opinion as to whether next week ' s budget will reverse this very damaging trend ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am the eternal optimist . 
i can assure honourable senators that I look forward with great anticipation and hope to the budget of next Tuesday . 
senator Spivak : 
that is a very encouraging answer . 
perhaps , as well , the honourable leader can tell us whether there are any particular plans for this specific category of researchers - and I would remind honourable senators that these are not students , they are post - doctoral fellows - so that they are not forced to leave the country . 
i would hope that this group might be mentioned favourably in your conversations with all the people who matter in the decision - making process in the government . 
senator Graham : 
that is for the Minister of Finance alone to know , and we will all await with keen anticipation what he has to say next Tuesday . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Prince Rupert Port Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 38 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Public Works and Government Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 39 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Veteran Affairs - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 50 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 52 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , as a representative of Western Canada , I am pleased to speak today in support of Bill C - 4 which contains amendments to the Canadian Wheat Board Act . 
the Canadian Wheat Board has a long and proud history of serving Prairie farmers over the course of almost 60 years . 
its strength rests on the so - called three pillars - single - desk selling , price pooling and government guarantees - under which farmers pool their grain and the Canadian Wheat Board sells it for them . 
i might point out that this applies only to wheat and barley that is destined for export or for human consumption here at home . 
Feedlots do not go through the board . 
for its part , the federal government provides financial guarantees for the wheat board ' s transactions , in effect letting the wheat board operate on the government ' s credit card and saving it - and the farmers it serves - tens of millions of dollars every year . 
the Canadian Wheat Board has a stellar reputation among its international customers . 
a study by three eminent farm economists showed that between 1980 and 1994 , farmers on average received $ 13.35 a tonne more for wheat sold through the Canadian Wheat Board than they would have earned selling it without the single desk . 
that is an average of $ 265 million each and every year going into the western economy . 
global customers who appreciate the reliability of supply the Wheat Board offers and the high - quality grain produced by Canadian farmers are willing to pay these higher prices . 
western Canadian grain producers are the beneficiaries of these premiums because all the Wheat Board ' s income , after operating expenses , goes to them . 
for all these reasons , the Government of Canada supports a strong Canadian Wheat Board . 
why , then , change it ? 
the government held extensive consultations over the last few years . 
first , a vote or plebiscite of barley producers last year resulted in nearly two - thirds voting to retain the board . 
next , the Western Grain Marketing Panel monitored numerous public meetings and thousands of letters , faxes and phone calls from farmers . 
the process also included the work of the standing committee of the other place , both on this bill and on its predecessor , Bill C - 72 . 
in all , the Government heard that the Canadian Wheat Board would be able to operate more efficiently and more effectively if it had more leeway in how it buys grain and how it pays farmers for that grain . 
farmers also said that while they support the single - desk concept , the Canadian Wheat Board as it now stands could be improved by being made less remote and more accountable . 
the government responded with Bill C - 4 , legislation that would empower western farmers with an extraordinary responsibility for how the Canadian Wheat Board operates , while fundamentally maintaining the three pillars on which the wheat board stands . 
the clearest message in all of the consultation that was undertaken was that producers wanted more say in what the wheat board does . 
under Bill C - 4 , the wheat board would no longer be governed by three to five commissioners appointed by the government without consultation , but rather by a 15 - person board of directors . 
elected directors , the majority , will be accountable to their electorate for how they manage the Canadian Wheat Board ' s business . 
ultimately , if producers are not satisfied with what the CWB is doing , they can change directors in subsequent elections . 
while this shift to producer power will greatly reduce the government ' s influence , the Government of Canada would continue to play a role in the governance of the board as a partner . 
the government , after all , would appoint five directors , including a president - CEO who would also serve as a director . 
however , the government would not be able to appoint the president until after it had fully consulted with the board . 
what the legislation basically does is require the government and the board of directors to come to a consensus about the right kind of person to lead the wheat board . 
through these five directors , the government would have a " window " on the wheat board ' s affairs . 
this window would allow the government to continue its guarantees - which can amount to $ 6 billion annually . 
it would also be important , as long as public powers are conferred on the CWB by Parliament , that the government appoint members to the board of directors . 
to clarify , honourable senators , the appointed directors would have no special status or powers . 
they would be selected to bring additional expertise to the board of directors which might not otherwise be available - something which is quite a common practice in the private sector . 
again , those appointed directors would be in the minority . 
the whole board of directors will direct the business and affairs of the wheat board and determine its strategic direction . 
they will have access to all the wheat board ' s sales data and financial information , without exception . 
more specifically , they will be able to assess the CWB ' s sales program , the price premiums achieved , and all operating costs and to determine whether the CWB is running efficiently . 
directors will also have the power to release any of this information to permit book holders , if they choose to do so . 
they will determine what needs to remain within the realm of commercial confidentiality , to protect the CWB ' s sales position , and what information can be disclosed publicly in terms of the salaries of employees or in terms of sales information , whether current or historical . 
with their complete knowledge of the CWB and its global competition , if the members of the board are not satisfied with existing operations or procedures , they would be able to take the necessary changes to improve the CWB ' s performance . 
they will choose a chairperson from among themselves and set their own salaries as well as that of the president . 
the directors will be able to appraise the president ' s performance each year and recommend , if necessary , that the president be fired . 
in addition to making the Canadian Wheat Board more accountable to farmers through the board of directors , Bill C - 4 will provide the board with the options it needs in today ' s fast - paced , competitive , global trading environment . 
for example , it will be able to make cash purchases of wheat and / or barley ; adjust initial payments quickly , just as soon as market conditions warrant and without waiting for government approval ; and allow individuals to " cash - out " of a marketing pool early , before the end of the crop year . 
the directors would implement these new " flexibility tools " when , in their good judgement , it would be beneficial to farmers to do so . 
to insure against losses from the use of these three tools - and these three tools only - Bill C - 4 allows for the creation of a contingency fund . 
it will be up to the board of directors , with its two - thirds majority elected by farmers , to decide when and how to create such a fund . 
in any event , the Government of Canada will continue to guarantee the CWB ' s initial payments set at the start of the crop year , its credit sales and its general borrowings . 
lastly , Bill C - 4 allows for any grains to be added , or taken away , from the Board ' s marketing mandate . 
that is a great bone of contention right now . 
the process for including a grain - in other words , adding it to the board ' s single - desk responsibility - can only be triggered by a written request from a legitimate organization whose membership consists solely of the producers of that grain . 
the inclusion clause would be available only for crops which currently come within the definition of " grain " in the existing CWB Act , namely oats , flax , rye and canola . 
the request would have to be advertised publicly , leaving at least 120 days for the farm community and others to react . 
the CWB ' s board of directors would then consider the request . 
the directors would need to examine all of the implications of such a move , including , among other things , the costs of inclusion , trade or commercial consequences , and the public comments received . 
if the directors ultimately agreed with the request for an inclusion - and that is the second stage - the whole matter would then have to be ratified by a democratic vote among the producers of the grain in question . 
the whole procedure - beginning , middle and end - would be fully and transparently in the hands of farmers . 
the existence of an inclusion clause does not , by itself , change the CWB ' s mandate . 
it merely sets out a clear procedure for new producers wanting to bring their grain in . 
as a matter of fairness and balance , any type of wheat or barley could also be excluded from the board ' s marketing mandate . 
it is not only an inclusion clause ; it works two ways . 
to make an exclusion , the board of directors first must be in agreement , and there must be an acceptable system to prevent the excluded grain from being mixed with Canadian Wheat Board grain in the handling system . 
finally , if the directors considered the amount of grain to be excluded to be significant , a producer vote would be held . 
honourable senators , those opposed to the inclusion and exclusion clauses have been quite vocal in their criticism . 
these provisions will allow only what the majority of producers wants . 
decisions will be made where they should be : in the hands of the farmers . 
the Canadian Wheat Board conducts $ 6 billion worth of business per year in more than 70 countries . 
it ranks among the top 10 Canadian exporters , and is one of Canada ' s biggest earners of foreign exchange . 
turning the page to a new century in just two short years will be a pivotal moment for a venture that was started in 1935 by the Honourable Richard Bedford Bennett , a great Conservative from Calgary . 
the government is determined that Canada will be prepared to make the most of the opportunities that lie ahead . 
having a Canadian Wheat Board with its strong underpinnings intact , but with the options it needs to operate effectively in today ' s fast - paced , competitive , global environment , will ensure that we will be ready . 
i support Bill C - 4 , and I urge my honourable colleagues to do the same . 
on motion of Senator Gustafson , debate adjourned . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
status of Senator Thompson - Fourth Report of Committee Adopted on Division 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented in the Senate earlier this day . 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , does the chairman intend to speak to the report ? 
senator Maheu : 
honourable senators , the regulation has been signed by the Clerk of the Privy Council , which gives us permission to put the matter before the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , which will be meeting soon . 
this confirms that the regulation will be published in the Canada Gazette . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , does the chairman of the committee intend to speak to the fourth report ? 
senator Maheu : 
i shall await the report from the Internal Economy Committee , which should be forthcoming soon . 
senator Murray : 
naturally , I would defer to the leaders on either side , if either of them wishes to speak to the fourth report . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we want an explanation of it . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
are we to receive an explanation from the committee chairman ? 
senator Murray : 
otherwise , I shall simply take part in the debate , if there is a debate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the motion before us is debatable . 
if no one wishes to debate it , I shall call for the vote . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , the essence of this report is that the Honourable Senator Thompson be found in contempt , that he be suspended for the remainder of the session , and that the matter of his expense allowance be referred to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration . 
honourable senators , I will vote for the adoption of the report because it is obvious that action on the matter of our colleague Senator Thompson is long overdue , and because I accept - having no alternative - the assurance that is implicit in the committee report that we are on solid legal and constitutional ground in doing what we are apparently about to do . 
if we are not , we shall certainly be made great fools of sometime from now . 
this is certainly an historic occasion . 
we are setting quite a precedent . 
never in the 130 - year history of this place has such a thing been done . 
why are we doing it ? 
the origin of our problem , in my humble opinion , lies within section 31 of the British North America Act of 1867 , which provides : 
( 1 ) if for Two consecutive Sessions of the Parliament he fails to give his Attendance in the Senate ; 
our colleague Senator Thompson has saved his seat up to this point by complying with the letter of that provision . 
he has saved his seat by showing up here once every couple of years so that he is present , physically , on one occasion , during a session . 
that provision of the Constitution Act , 1867 was enacted at a time when sessions of Parliament lasted a few months . 
i have taken the trouble to look at the record . 
it was not until the Second World War that a session lasted as long as 12 months , and in one case 14 months . 
it is in very recent times that sessions have gone on past 12 months . 
the Thirty - second Parliament , between 1980 and 1984 , had a session that lasted for three years and seven months , and then in each of the Thirty - third , Thirty - fourth and Thirty - fifth Parliaments we had sessions lasting two years and longer . 
what has happened , therefore , is that a senator such as Senator Thompson is in compliance with the law by showing up here once every couple of years . 
honourable senators , it seems to me that the remedy for the situation , at least so far as the future is concerned , is to proceed to a constitutional amendment of section 31 of the Constitution Act , 1867 . 
my layman ' s opinion , for what it is worth , is that we could amend that section of the Constitution by a constitutional resolution of the Senate and the House of Commons . 
my humble opinion is that we would not need seven provinces with 50 per cent of the population in order to amend section 31 . 
in other words , we can amend it by the amending formula in section 44 , which says that : 
subject to sections 41 and 42 , Parliament may exclusively make laws amending the Constitution of Canada in relation to the executive government of Canada or the Senate and House of Commons . 
if I am right , and it would be for the government to decide whether this opinion is sound or not , I would call on my friend the Leader of the Government in the Senate to canvass his cabinet colleagues and to consult with honourable senators and to place before us at an early date , a resolution to amend the Constitution in respect of section 31 . 
we can provide that a senator must attend at the Senate in each session for a certain percentage of the sittings . 
it seems to me that the remedy for the future lies in an amendment to section 31 of the BNA Act . 
i put it forward as a layman ' s opinion that that section can be amended by a resolution of the two Houses of this Parliament without the necessity of obtaining any provincial consent whatsoever . 
as I say , it is quite a precedent that we are setting . 
i cannot foresee it , but I hope I live long enough , and I hope we all live long enough , to see to what purpose this precedent may be used in the future . 
i think it is something we should ponder . 
if we are to do what is proposed here , I think we should at least do it with dignity and with some due formality and solemnity . 
therefore , I trust there will be a recorded vote on this report . 
under the circumstances , I think that every honourable senator should stand and have his or her name counted for or against the report , even if we are unanimous , as we well may be . 
i trust that that is what is intended . 
if not , I hope there is at least one other senator who will stand with me because I think it takes two to ask for a recorded vote , when the time comes . 
it is immaterial to me whether the recorded vote takes place this afternoon or on the next day we sit , which is Tuesday . 
it might be a slight exaggeration to say that we have waited for 30 years to deal with this , but we have waited a long time . 
my friend Senator Ghitter placed on the record a week ago Wednesday the attendance record for Senator Thompson since 1984 . 
i have seen reports in the media , which I believe to be true , that all in all he has attended 47 times in the past 30 years . 
i am in my nineteenth year here , and it was open to me at any time to stand up and draw attention to what we all knew to be the case , which was the flagrant absenteeism of our colleague . 
others have been here longer than me , still others have been here three , five , eight and ten years . 
none of us ever raised this matter in public because it is not done . 
what we are guilty of is treating this place like a club instead of doing our duty by one of the Houses of Parliament . 
we have been smoked out by the media . 
the media have exposed this situation . 
how mortifying that we should be smoked out by them , but that is what has happened . 
if I may be judgmental for a minute , I think that the greater sin is the sin of our friends opposite , because parliamentary tradition has it that these matters are first addressed in the caucus of the party to which the person belongs . 
our friend Senator Lavoie - Roux , the former chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , tried on a number of occasions to persuade her colleagues on the committee to look seriously at the issue of Senate absenteeism . 
senator Robertson , the former chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , also tried . 
our colleagues opposite rejected it out of hand . 
no discussion ! 
always kept under cover . 
( 1500 ) 
i was hoping there would be an explanation . 
i hope someone can enlighten me as to the legal and constitutional grounds for doing what we are about to do . 
on the basis that we are on solid ground , I shall vote for the report and , as I have said , express my own apologies to the people of Canada for my failure to deal with this matter in public before now . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this is indeed a solemn and historic occasion . 
we have made a decision in a committee on which we are now asking for the approval of this whole chamber . 
this is something that our institution has never done before . 
i attended the committee last evening in the place of one of our senators who is , unfortunately , ill . 
we are asked to deal with questions as to our authority ; questions of contempt ; questions of precedent ; questions , as Senator Murray quite wisely put it , of what happens next . 
the legal opinions given to members of the committee in their meetings of one week ago and again last night were unanimous in the issue of contempt . 
they indicated that a failure to respond to a direct order of the Senate issued not once but twice , was contempt . 
they were also of the opinion that contempt was and could be a judgment if someone brought the institution into disrespect . 
your committee found Senator Thompson to be in contempt of the institution . 
it then became the difficult job to determine what should be done on the basis of such contempt . 
there were three routes that we could have followed . 
we needed to find explanations for each one of those routes and determine whether we had the authority to take them . 
clearly , we had the authority to censure or to reprimand , to call him before the Senate and have him reprimanded by the Speaker , but there was certainly unanimous agreement among the senators that that would not be adequate . 
on this , the constitutional experts were divided two to one . 
our own legal counsel , Mark Audcent , believed we did not . 
he was supported in that very strong opinion by Mr. Finkelstein who also said we did not . 
their argument , if I can summarize it briefly , was that while we received our powers from Great Britain and while they were to be all of the powers that were given to the House of Commons - and , yes , the House of Commons both in Britain and in Canada has the right to expel - we still had clear limitations on our power . 
we could not find , to our satisfaction , that any one of those five conditions had been breached . 
therefore , we were not in a situation where we could find the seat to have become vacant . 
in their view , therefore , we could not expel . 
the other option for us is the one that the committee decided to act upon last evening . 
that was the matter of suspension . 
the two Houses have the right to do that by rule or order which would then become a regulation . 
in essence , that is what we did last evening in committee . 
we examined what kind of regulation or rule would be required and whether such a regulation was in place . 
we then examined whether Senator Thompson , if he was suspended , would be subject to that regulation . 
that is why the two reports were introduced today . 
the first report created the rule . 
the second report made Senator Thompson subject to the rule by virtue of his suspension from the Senate . 
there is no question that there is some argument still to be made on the issue of expulsion , but the majority were convinced last evening . 
if I am not mistaken , there was one abstention and one vote against . 
the majority in the committee , representing both sides of the chamber , on careful reflection decided that we , within the rule of law , could only go so far as to suspend Senator Thompson and that we had done , in our judgment , everything that we were allowed to do within due process and , at the same time , everything we had the authority to do . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
i thank her very much for the full report on the proceedings last night . 
we do not have the verbatim transcript . 
i had not heard very much except the outcome . 
with regard to the matter of contempt , we have all heard of contempt of Parliament before but it has always been someone outside of our house or outside of the other place who was alleged to be in contempt of Parliament for one reason for another . 
was any distinction drawn or any precedent adduced by the committee ' s legal and constitutional advisors as to holding a member of Parliament in contempt of Parliament ? 
i also have a question about the deputy leader ' s statement that actions which would bring the chamber into disrespect could be regarded as contempt . 
does the Deputy Leader of the Government , and other honourable senators , not think that bringing this chamber into disrespect is quite a subjective matter ? 
there have been times in the past 19 years when I may even have been accused of that myself . 
i may even have accused others of it . 
however , the remedy of holding a majority vote as to whether someone has brought the chamber into disrespect , and the consequent suspension of that senator , is that being seriously considered ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I think it is fair to say , and as will be reflected in the transcript of the committee , that the area of contempt that was of the greatest significance to the members who were in attendance last evening was the contempt for failing to obey a direct order of the institution . 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
my understanding is that the regulation that was passed earlier by the Senate was vetted pursuant to section 59 of the Parliament of Canada Act , or by virtue of procedures under the Statutory Instruments Act . 
the Leader of the Government kindly gave us a copy of a signed document which says that this matter has been vetted by the Privy Council pursuant to that procedure . 
on the last page of these documents that were kindly shared with this side by the Leader of the Government , it states that this regulation will be published in the Canada Gazette on March 4 , in volume 132 , number 5 . 
senator Carstairs : 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , at the outset I should like to congratulate Senator Carstairs on her fair explanation of what occurred last evening . 
i should also like to congratulate the chairman and members of the committee . 
although I am not a member of the committee and was merely sitting in on the deliberations , I thought the chairman handled the meeting in an appropriate and professional way . 
the questions that were asked were astute and appropriate and ones , which certainly illuminated the difficulty of the decision which the committee members were required to make last night . 
honourable senators , the issues before us are not easy ones to deal with . 
as Senator Murray has stated , we are in unknown territory here . 
this afternoon , we are commencing the setting of a precedent on a matter that has never been applied , or tried , or even raised before in the history of this honourable chamber . 
it is not a matter that we should take lightly . 
as we come to this conclusion , we must also address the privileges of this institution in which we reside . 
the powers and privileges that reside in a parliamentary institution cannot be taken lightly . 
the powers that reside in the Houses of Parliament or in our legislatures are powers that have evolved since the Magna Carta . 
they are powers for which people have fought and died . 
they are powers that reside in this institution , and it is important for us to ensure that we maintain the powers and privileges that we enjoy . 
one of the privileges that we enjoy in a parliamentary process is the ultimate privilege to expel a member who is bringing dishonour and disrepute to the chamber , and is ignoring the requirements and orders of the institution . 
i listened carefully to the legal opinions last night . 
i endeavoured to bring whatever legal background that I have to the matter . 
you can put two lawyers in the same room and you will have an opinion on the one hand and an opinion on the other hand . 
as one who has spent 25 years in the legal profession , I am aware of the nature of argument , and the nature of concern , and how to advise one ' s client . 
good lawyers advise because that is their job . 
what are the remedies that are available to Senator Thompson on the basis of whatever course of action we take ? 
we must not only examine what we do , but we must also examine the remedies left to Senator Thompson - or perhaps later in the day , Mister Thompson - on the basis of the position that he has put us in , and the position that he , himself , is in . 
in other words , would he have a remedy in a court of law ? 
as those who were at the meeting last night can confirm , the answer was basically that his remedy was to come to the Senate . 
the courts would not deal with this matter , nor should the courts deal with what we do here , since we police ourselves and our members . 
that is not for the courts of Canada to decide . 
we are the ultimate court in this land . 
we are the body which passes the laws in this land . 
it is not for a court of law to come into the Senate of Canada and say : " You have done wrong . " 
if Senator Thompson wishes to come here , he may do so . 
however , we were told last night that his remedy is to approach the Senate and ask to be heard . 
i then looked at the power of suspension . 
i have no problems with Senator Thompson being suspended . 
however , what does that mean if we suspend him ? 
it means that if Senator Thompson does not resign , we have not resolved anything . 
just imagine proroguing this Parliament and commencing another session ; and if that happens , as it normally does every two years , in March of next year there would be another Speech from the Throne , and if Senator Thompson then comes to take his seat in the chamber , what do we do ? 
i would suggest that , at that time , in order to find him in contempt , if he is in his seat , and stays in his seat and is present , we must then make a new finding of contempt . 
if we must make such a new finding , what would be the nature of it ? 
we would have some trouble doing that . 
does that mean that Senator Thompson can now sit here , having been suspended by us , until he reaches the age of 75 , in December of 1999 , and then leave ? 
do you think we would not be ridiculed in Canada if that happens ? 
i made a bet with Senator Gigant è s , who said that Senator Thompson would resign in a week . 
each of us has left $ 3.25 with the Clerk on that . 
what if he does not resign ? 
i wonder what will happen if he says to the Senate , " Too bad , Senate . 
i will wait . 
i will stay in Mexico and I will come back the next time around . 
i will not take my pension now . 
let us say Mr. Thompson says , " I will take the $ 10,000 and wait until December of 1999 and then I will take my pension . " 
then where are we ? 
i was on some phone - in shows today , and I can tell honourable senators that Canadians know what is happening . 
those questions were asked of me . 
questions were put to me this morning from Hamilton and even Calgary . 
this suspension is not clean - cut . 
in fact , the suspension is not clean at all . 
although I know it is the will of the Senate to suspend , and although I know that that will happen this afternoon , I cannot support the resolution . 
i think that the better way is to stand up and expel , make it clear - cut , finish it off , and get on with life . 
the way we are doing it right now is not clear - cut . 
it leaves things dangling . 
it does not satisfy me and , more important , it does not satisfy the Canadian public . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , perhaps I am missing something and my lack of legal training will show here . 
my friend said that the courts have no business telling us what we can and cannot do . 
if we purport to take an action that is unconstitutional , surely the courts can declare our action to have been unconstitutional . 
they do it all the time . 
if we purport to declare a seat vacant , and supposing that the Prime Minister recommends the name of another person to the Governor General to fill that supposedly vacant seat and the courts find it unconstitutional , all of those actions would have been nullified , would they not ? 
senator Ghitter : 
the response we were given by Mr. Finkelstein last evening , as many will confirm , was that if that did occur , the seat would become vacant . 
that was understood in his view . 
senator Murray : 
was it his view that we had the power to vacate a seat ? 
senator Ghitter : 
No. That is quite right , as Senator Carstairs said . 
we were told by Mr. Finkelstein last night that , although there was a strong argument to be made for the power to expel , it was his view that it would be inappropriate for us to do so , that we would be taking risks if we were to do that . 
he questioned our power to do that . 
that was his opinion . 
my position was more on where Senator Thompson ' s powers lie if we do take such action . 
where does he go ? 
that is the distinction . 
the point that was expressed to us last night is that he has to come back here , not to the courts . 
that was the legal opinion , as I understood it . 
others may have another interpretation . 
hon. John . 
honourable senators , I wish to ask a question of my honourable friend . 
senator Ghitter assumes that what is involved here is the right of a senator , but the truth of the matter , of course , is that much more than the right of a senator is involved . 
i am here as a senator from the province of Nova Scotia ; Senator Ghitter is here as a representative of the province of Alberta . 
let me put forward a scenario and see how Senator Ghitter will deal with the question with which I will conclude . 
suppose a majority in this house found something done by Senator Ghitter offensive and consequently decided to expel him , thus creating a vacancy in the Senate representation from the province of Alberta , a vacancy which the Prime Minister of the day , of another political party , immediately filled with a proper person . 
what would Senator Ghitter argue in that situation ? 
you have had a proper vote and I was duly expelled , although I do not like it , and the appointment of my replacement is good and lawful . 
i applaud this rule of law . " 
is that what he would say ? 
senator Ghitter : 
yes , of course . 
absolutely . 
i would not like being expelled , of course not , but I say that this body has the power to do that , period . 
senator Stewart : 
and the Prime Minister in that situation , obviously , has the right to appoint the replacement ? 
that is my position . 
senator Stewart : 
i understand what my honourable friend is saying . 
in other words , the people of Alberta , who may very well be quite satisfied with Senator Ghitter , would have no rights . 
it would be the majority in this place and the leader of their party , probably all drawn from the east who would have all the rights . 
is that what Senator Ghitter is advocating ? 
senator Ghitter : 
we are getting into difficult territory now , senator . 
senator Stewart : 
yes , you are . 
senator Ghitter : 
from what you are saying , the people of Alberta would say Senator Ghitter has no authority to be there because we did not put him there . 
i hear that all the time . 
senator Stewart : 
grant me a pre - supposition that Senator Ghitter does have considerable support from the people of Alberta . 
is he saying that that support can be set aside by a majority from Ontario and Quebec and a prime minister residing , let us say , in the city of Toronto ? 
is that what he is saying ? 
senator Ghitter : 
Yes. 
senator Stewart : 
i was afraid that would be your answer . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , by way of precatory words , law schools - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i presume , Honourable Senator Grafstein , that this is not a question . 
senator Grafstein : 
it is a question . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
very well . 
senator Grafstein : 
law schools in Alberta and law schools in Ontario obviously teach different principles . 
let me see if I understand Senator Ghitter . 
he says to the Senate , to the people of Canada and to the people of his region : " We do not have the constitutional power in the Senate to expel a senator , but because the senator may not have a perfect remedy , we will still go ahead and do it . " 
is that what Senator Ghitter is saying to the Senate ? 
counsel has said and Senator Murray has said , we do not have the constitutional power under the rule of law to expel that senator . 
we have the right to suspend him , that is clear , but we do not have the right to expel him . 
however , the senator seems to be saying we can certainly expel him but he may not have perfect remedy . 
is the honourable senator saying that this is the standard or the rule of law or the legal or moral standard that he would like to set for the Senate ? 
i do not agree with that . 
in Ontario , we do not agree . 
maybe in Alberta they do , but not in Ontario . 
senator Ghitter : 
i wish I could be as authoritative as Senator Grafstein . 
senator Grafstein : 
well , be authoritative . 
this is an important issue . 
this is the first time in over 100 years that this house has done this . 
i can tell you that . 
senator Ghitter : 
that was quite a speech , Senator Grafstein . 
if we can accuse anyone of grandstanding , that is what I just heard . 
when individuals honourably bring forth arguments , and then you step up and refer to those arguments as " grandstanding , " I take great offence at those kinds of comments . 
let me tell you , sir , from your Ontario law school , that the legal opinions we had were not as clear as you might think . 
historically in this country , back to Louis Riel , we had arguments about the power of the House of Commons to expel . 
in fact , Louis Riel did not accept an order from the House of Commons , and they expelled him . 
in the province of Nova Scotia , there have been expulsion , as Senator Buchanan , could tell us . 
if you look at Beauchesne , he says the very same thing . 
it is not quite as clear as the Ontario law schools might put forward . 
i accept the other legal point of view , which may differ from yours but may be just as strong . 
i take great offence at your comments . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if there are no further questions , I recognize the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , while I will support the committee ' s recommendations , I will not do so with any enthusiasm , nor even with any satisfaction or sense of accomplishment , although I do believe that , under the circumstances , the Senate has little choice but to endorse what Senator Maheu is urging on behalf of her colleagues . 
passing judgment and imposing penalties on one ' s colleagues is not only distasteful but offensive . 
this is not to suggest that the action we are being asked to take is not the proper one ; only that there should be another mechanism in place to preclude our having to act as judge , jury and prosecutor , as we will be doing shortly . 
in this case , we had no alternative but to engage in what could be termed " rough justice . " 
it is to be hoped that this is a unique case , the likes of which we will never see again . 
nonetheless , serious thought should be given to putting into place a mechanism , a procedure , which , in the event of the misconduct of one of its members , will limit the Senate to a final determination only , and thus avoid a repetition of the tortuous and sometimes confusing path we have taken over the past few weeks . 
the answer , of course , is no , far from it , as having senators here in attendance at all times would quickly lead to a neglect of responsibilities rather than a fulfilment of them . 
are we to ask Senator Keon to abandon all his outside activities as a medical practitioner on behalf of his fellow citizens , to leave the operating table where he is saving lives in order to sit here and maintain perfect attendance as a prerequisite of his remaining in the Senate ? 
are we to ask Senator Pearson to abandon her efforts on behalf of the children of the world if she wants to remain in the Senate ? 
are we to ask Senator Cohen to abandon all of her of efforts over the years with her involvement in social welfare , in order to maintain her status here ? 
are we to ask Senator Beaudoin to stop advising foreign countries which are trying to develop a constitutional framework , in order to remain a senator and stay in this place , fixed to his seat ? 
are we to ask Senator Chalifoux to stop her efforts on behalf of the M é tis community , in which she has been actively engaged for so many years , in order to avoid criticism because her absences here are caused by her involvement with her community ? 
is Senator Fairbairn ' s devotion to the cause of literacy , which takes her away from this place , cause for her to be criticized for not having the attendance record that some feel must be perfect ? 
Canadians are being told that attendance should be equated with assiduity , and absence equated with neglect . 
we all know , those who follow this chamber seriously , how false that impression is . 
yes , one of our colleagues has grossly abused the privileges of this house , the first and I dare say the last to do so . 
his suspension and loss of salary are consistent with the theory of non - performance and non - remuneration . 
however , the true value of the contribution of a senator is not to be found in an attendance record ; far from it . 
it is to be found in his or her participation in committee , in parliamentary associations , as representatives of their country abroad , and not least , in their active involvement in their community on behalf of their less fortunate fellow citizens . 
if being a senator enhances their contribution to improve Canadian society and means less than perfect attendance , then I say more power to them . 
canada should be grateful to have such citizens in their midst ! 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I wish to make very brief comments on this matter because I consider Senator Thompson a friend . 
these votes are perhaps the most difficult for me since I came to the Senate . 
to correct the record , this process began last summer in a committee chaired by Senator Kenny . 
with the greatest of regret for my old friend Andy Thompson , but with pride in the Senate , I will be supporting all these various votes . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , the motion brought forward by Senator Ghitter last week was straightforward . 
senator Thompson has shown contempt for the Senate of Canada and for Parliament , and he should be expelled . 
i will support that motion should we have an opportunity to deal with it . 
i have listened to the debate and the arguments advanced with respect to the legal difficulties in doing that . 
unfortunately , like everyone else , I am in the position of not being able to rely on much procedural literature to formulate a complete decision , because this is something new . 
senator Murray has raised in the debate this afternoon some important matters and suggestions relating to a constitutional amendment . 
however , from a social or moral standpoint , I still believe that Senator Thompson should be expelled . 
we have before us a proposal from the committee which examined this matter carefully . 
it meets the tests of the Parliament of Canada Act and the steps that were taken to have the regulation properly registered pursuant to the Statutory Instruments Act . 
to suspend without benefits is a species of the genus of expulsion . 
therefore , I will support the motion , although it is not as much as I would have liked to have seen . 
senator Stewart : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask my honourable friend a question . 
i will ask basically the same question that I put to Senator Ghitter , but I must say something first because of a comment that was made in the meantime . 
it has been suggested that the expulsion of a senator is comparable to the expulsion of a member of the House of Commons . 
certainly in Great Britain members of the House of Commons have been expelled . 
John Wilkes was expelled four times in one session . 
he was expelled , re - elected , expelled , and re - elected . 
however , in the case of a member of the House of Commons , the electorate can decide to send , as in the case of Wilkes , the ball back across the nip . 
that is not true in the case of a senator . 
let us say that Senator Kinsella was found offensive by reason of his vote on some bill and was persistent in his voting . 
am I to understand that he believes that the majority in the Senate would have the right to vote to expel him so that the Prime Minister of the day could appoint someone from his own political party to represent the province of New Brunswick in the Senate ? 
is that his position ? 
senator Kinsella : 
my position is that there are no precedents . 
i looked at the House of Lords , and the situation there is even less helpful . 
senator Stewart : 
that is not relevant because that is not a federal house . 
senator Kinsella : 
it is not relevant . 
our situation is radically different from that of a member sitting by virtue of an election . 
frankly , I think that what Senator Thompson has done is wrong . 
it is on that basis that he should be expelled . 
i recognize the difficulty . 
i am persuaded by Senator Ghitter ' s arguments . 
at the same time , we have a report following a particular procedure . 
i am satisfied that this particular procedure meets the test of being legally acceptable , and I will be supporting it , although I think that we could have gone further . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , as you are aware , last week Senator Ghitter put forward a motion to expel Andrew Thompson . 
it was not done lightly . 
i have heard all the legal arguments , and yes , there are arguments on both sides . 
yes , Senator Stewart , I understand where you are coming from . 
however , if we do this today , we will have set a precedent , and I think the precedent will be a determining factor in any subsequent considerations of expulsion . 
i do not think we do this lightly , and I personally do not do this lightly . 
i , like Senator Murray , wish to apologize to the Canadian people . 
i have not been here for 19 years , but I have been here long enough to have known that Senator Thompson was a no - show . 
i support Senator Ghitter not for legal reasons . 
not being a lawyer , I cannot do that . 
i must accept what I hear from the lawyers . 
there is enough evidence to support a case for expulsion . 
he has virtually spit in their faces . 
for that , I would like to see a clear , distinct , permanent message sent to Senator Thompson that he should be expelled . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I , too , was in favour of Senator Ghitter ' s motion last week because of the desperation I heard from the people in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada that something had to be done about Senator Thompson . 
i thought at that time that the committee had already canvassed all of the legal opinions and that it was time that we , as a body , acted . 
i reluctantly allowed another week to go by . 
i am , however , persuaded that we have taken the cautious route , and it is the more appropriate route . 
is the issue here that we want to punish Senator Thompson or is it that we want to make Senator Thompson accountable ? 
do we want to be accountable to the people of Canada , or do we simply want to take account of what the press have been saying and what some members of the House of Commons have been doing ? 
they have not only diminished the Senate ; they have diminished themselves as politicians . 
they have brought us into disrepute , and they have brought democratic institutions into disrepute . 
having served in countries that call themselves democracies and that take the rule of law to mean the letter of the law not the spirit of the law , I think that we must do what the majority opinion of the Senate tells us . 
we should not reach for the edge of the law , the letter of the law , to get at Senator Thompson . 
i believe that some measure of responsibility falls on all of us , not just on Senate members who should have raised the matter of Senator Thompson publicly . 
it goes beyond that . 
it goes beyond all of those in a position of authority who knew something about Senator Thompson and did not take action . 
i do not want to be punitive through the democratic system ; I want to be accountable . 
to be punitive would be to now say that I want to extract my due and that then , somehow , I could sit in this Senate without attempting to change further troubling matter . 
i hope that if we take this route of being accountable rather than punitive , we will support the senators who have been here doing their jobs , that we will work within the spirit of the law . 
we are sometimes fallible , not infallible , as the public and the press sometimes want us to be . 
we have made mistakes , and we have made a mistake about Senator Thompson . 
we might make another mistake , but we are conscious of the reaction of the public and the press . 
we want to do , I believe , the appropriate thing within the rule of law , and that is take a sober second thought , take the best advice we can get , and then try to take the toughest measure that we can against ourselves . 
i think the toughest measure is the one that is being proposed by this committee . 
i do not think that we should be preoccupied by Senator Thompson . 
i would have defended Senator Thompson ' s rights if he had not taken the opportunity to make comments in public - and I take them to be correct because he has neither taken the time to correct them , nor has he taken any other action - about other senators and how they work . 
i say to the House of Commons members and the press who would attack the us : 
get involved in changing your democracy . 
i believe that this is a good and fair step towards senators becoming accountable . 
i hope we will take other steps . 
there are many other things that we can do to modernize and better our institution , and to be more accountable ourselves . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I will proceed with the motion . 
with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 55 ( 1 ) ( g ) , it was moved by the Honourable Senator Maheu , seconded by the Honourable Senator Perrault , that this report be adopted now . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
an Hon. Senator : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
will those honourable senators in favour of the motion please say " yea " ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
yea . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
will those honourable senators against the motion please say " nay " ? 
an Hon. Senator : 
nay . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in my opinion , the " yeas " have it . 
senator Murray : 
i wish to have a recorded vote . 
and two honourable senators having risen . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the question before the Senate is : 
shall the fourth report of the committee be adopted ? 
motion agreed to and report adopted on the following division : 
yeas 
the HONOURABLE SENATORS 
nays 
the HONOURABLE SENATORS 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , unfortunately I missed the vote , but had I been here I would have voted with the majority on this issue . 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the consideration of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , tabled in the Senate on December 16 , 1997 . - ( 
honourable Senator Forest ) . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , at the outset , I wish to thank Senator Bonnell for this initiative and I trust that in his retirement he will continue to pursue this cause . 
my appreciation also goes to all honourable senators who brought unique perspectives to and enriched our debate in such a collegial manner . 
my gratitude goes to Jill Ann Joseph and all members of the staff , including Grant Purves and Robin Farquard . 
the pressure under which they worked is only matched by my amazement at their dedication , professionalism and patience with the committee members . 
special appreciation is due to Dr. John Allan , who assisted me in focusing my concerns in a constructive manner . 
on June 19 , 1996 , I rose in this chamber to express my support for the motion brought by Senator Bonnell that the inquiry on the serious state of post - secondary education be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
i rise once again to speak on matters of post - secondary education . 
i express my support for the report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , to which the inquiry was referred . 
the report contains recommendations that if adopted and implemented , will do much to ensure the future health of our system of post - secondary education and to ensure that the system is accessible to those Canadians who have the ability and determination to benefit from post - secondary education . 
honourable senators , time does not permit me to cover all the areas of concern that I have with respect to the state of post - secondary education in Canada . 
a good portion of our debate centred on student indebtedness and government responsibilities . 
i regret that more in - depth studies were not initiated on other aspects of post - secondary education . 
however , I simply wish to flag these areas at this time . 
i wish to underscore what Senator Lavoie - Roux and the committee report stated with respect to the state of post - graduate studies and students and their ability to remain in Canada . 
there is a danger that if we do not stem the tide now , we will be creating a shortage of skills and , therefore , skills - based technologies and industries in the future . 
another aspect is the fact that there is a growing tendency towards consolidation . 
while this is commendable in part , it leaves the risk that consolidation will drive post - secondary educational resources into solely major centres . 
our report touches on the fact that the vibrancy of the post - secondary educational institutions in all areas of Canada contributes to the enrichment , success and stability of this country . 
excellence is to be pursued in all regions and corners of this country . 
in fact , CEGEPS , colleges and small universities are vital to the rural and isolated areas of Canada . 
while technology can afford these opportunities to some measure , it cannot replace person - to - person contact . 
finally , I wish to highlight that , while downsizing has hit all Canadians , there is a tendency by some government officials and perhaps by the public at large and the media to characterize universities as being resistant to change . 
in my personal experience , confirmed by our committee hearings , universities have changed and have responded to fiscal restraints , and , in the process , have been innovative and creative in anticipating future needs and new ways of cooperating and engaging in relationships . 
universities are to be commended for this spirit of cooperation and assisted in greater measure to ensure their survival . 
there needs to be more attention to infrastructure support and collaboration in policy formulation . 
i will now return to the main emphasis of our report . 
in the course of the last 15 years , there has been a massive decline in the number of jobs in Canada requiring a high school diploma or less . 
in contrast , employment growth has been in those areas that require at least graduation from a post - secondary institution . 
this is an asymmetry that we ignore at our peril . 
employment opportunities for the relatively unskilled are being displaced by technological advances and by increasing competition from other countries . 
if Canadians are to be absorbed successfully into the world of employment , as clearly they must be , then they must first be provided with the knowledge and skills demanded by employers in the technology - and information - intensive global economy . 
canada must be at the forefront of the development of the knowledge necessary to compete in this global economy . 
meeting these critical requirements will depend on several factors but none is more important than ensuring the necessary level and quality of investment in post - secondary education . 
with the requisite investments , what we may accomplish is boundless ; without it , our relative decline is virtually certain . 
before commenting on the thrust of the special committee report , I will take a moment to comment on some general issues that must inform and shape any recommendations concerning post - secondary education . 
i trust that these will be followed in the upcoming budget . 
it has also been recognized that these dividends accrue both to those in whom educational investments are made and to society at large . 
we all benefit from living in a society , the members of which have been sufficiently educated to assume productive roles and behave responsibly as citizens . 
in the case of elementary and secondary education , the spillover benefits to society in general are such a large part of the total benefits that these levels of education are normally financed through the budget process rather than provided on a fee - for - service basis . 
for post - secondary education , the situation is different . 
the norm at the post - secondary level is to require those who benefit directly from post - secondary education to pay , in the form of tuition , a significant portion of the cost of their education . 
this is done because a very large share of the benefits of such education accrue directly to those privileged to attend our post - secondary institutions . 
these favoured individuals - and make no mistake , they are favoured - typically enjoy significantly higher incomes , less frequent unemployment and , when it is encountered , unemployment of a shorter duration than do those who have not attended our post - secondary institutions . 
over their lifetimes , our post - secondary graduates simply enjoy a better social and economic status . 
we must not ignore these considerations in a review of post - secondary education . 
costs not covered by tuition must be borne by the typical taxpayer who , unfortunately at this time , is still not a graduate of our post - secondary system . 
to ask these taxpayers to bear a disproportionate share of the costs of post - secondary education is essentially to propose a redistribution of income from those with relatively low lifetime incomes to benefit those with relatively high lifetime incomes . 
such a proposal would clearly be fiscally unacceptable . 
equity in financing post - secondary education , therefore , necessitates a continuation of the present practice of requiring those who benefit directly from it to contribute a reasonable share of the cost of the education . 
it also means that poverty should not be an impediment , nor should such issues as place of residence in Canada , or any other factors covered by the human rights legislation . 
that post - secondary education generates benefits that are not limited to those who participate directly in the post - secondary process is both an advantage and a disadvantage . 
the spillover benefits may be considered as a social dividend accruing to society at large , and this is clearly advantageous . 
it is the case , however , that neither the direct nor indirect benefits respect provincial boundaries . 
in consequence , there is no presumption that a province can fully capture all of the gains generated by its investments in post - secondary education . 
by virtue of their education , our post - secondary graduates have access to larger and more varied markets for their skills . 
they thus have enhanced employment opportunities , and mobility allows them to move to these opportunities at their will . 
this may well result in their being lost to the province that invested in their post - secondary education . 
similarly , where the investment takes the form of support for research and development at our universities , the knowledge created should be as widely available as possible , and not limited to the jurisdiction in which the researchers reside . 
the special committee , of course , was very conscious that education is a constitutional responsibility of the provinces , but we were also aware that in recent decades , through a variety of means - tax point abatements under Established Program Financing , transfers under the Canada Health and Social Transfer , funding of research by the national granting councils , Canada Student Loans , aboriginal education and many other initiatives - the federal government has contributed essentially half of the cost of post - secondary education in Canada . 
the federal role and contribution thus has a solid basis , both in theory and in fact . 
i was most pleased to have this view confirmed by the Honourable Robert W . Mitchell - then minister of post - secondary education and skills training for Saskatchewan , and now Minister of Labour - when he appeared before the special committee . 
the minister specifically stated that Saskatchewan was " very content with the strong leadership shown by the federal government over many years in this important area . " 
he went on to observe that " I fear that if we lose the involvement of the national government on these issues , then we will pay the price of an increasing balkanization ... " 
while respectful of the constitutional issue , I share Minister Mitchell ' s view on the necessity of a continuing , active role for the federal government . 
in its deliberations , the special committee emphasized - and I believe rightly - the investment nature of expenditures on post - secondary education . 
it is characteristic of investments that they require substantial initial outlays and yield a subsequent flow of benefits over a protracted period - in this case , over the lifetime of those in whom the educational investments have been made . 
this pattern gives rise to a financing problem . 
even though investing in one ' s post - secondary education is probably the best investment that a young Canadian can make , the " dividends " are not available when the educational costs are incurred . 
a majority of our students , albeit a shrinking majority , have managed , probably with the assistance of family , friends , private loans and employment , to refrain from resorting to our student loan programs in order to invest in their post - secondary education . 
my second observation concerns the growing number of students who , increasingly , are having to access the student loan programs . 
while it is important that we distinguish between these , it is also important that we understand that both crises have a common origin . 
in recent years , the economic climate has been unkind both to the students and the graduates of our post - secondary institutions . 
well - paying part - time jobs have been extremely scarce , and this has forced students to rely excessively on borrowing to finance their studies and their living expenses . 
moreover , this difficulty has been exacerbated by the rapid increases in tuition , attributable to the cuts in federal transfers to the provinces and the associated decreases in provincial operating grants to our post - secondary institutions . 
slow growth and unacceptably high unemployment rates have also resulted in a significant number of graduates being unable to find , within a reasonable period after graduation , positions that utilized and rewarded the investments they had made in their education . 
without such positions , some have had difficulty in servicing their student loan debts . 
still others are deterred by the economic uncertainty from commencing studies for which they anticipate substantial borrowing will be necessary . 
another area on which I would like to comment is of particular importance to my own province . 
in Saskatchewan , the fastest growing component of our educational system is aboriginal education . 
i would suggest that there is no area in which investment in post - secondary education yields higher dividends than increasing the number of aboriginal graduates . 
our report has several proposals relating to what must be done in this area , and I particularly commend these recommendations to you . 
i also particularly commend the recommendation that the tuition and education tax credits be made refundable credits . 
permitting unused credits to be carried forward and used in the future , as was done in the last budget , was certainly an improvement , but making them refundable would assist students when their need is greatest , namely when they are still students . 
restructuring the tax provisions for the registered educational savings plans so that they parallel those of the registered retirement savings plans is another commendable tax measure proposed in the report . 
this will encourage and reward self - reliance on the part of families which endeavour to make early provision for post - secondary education for their children . 
given my interest in international affairs , I am gratified that the report contains recommendations designed to more deeply involve Canada and Canadians in the international dimensions of post - secondary education . 
one regret , however , is that it does not flag the possible negative consequences of the increasing reliance on extremely high tuition fees charged to our visa students . 
many such students , when they return to their own countries , play a vital role in expanding our trade relations . 
we must not forgo this considerable advantage by too short a focus on cost recovery . 
i am also pleased that our report recommends several measures to promote an expansion of research and development in Canada in general , and in our universities in particular . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i regret interrupting , but the honourable senator ' s 15 - minute time period has expired . 
is leave granted to extend that period ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Andreychuk : 
thank you . 
i will try to be brief . 
i draw attention to the fact that the report cautions against excessive reliance on research and development partnership arrangements with the corporate sector . 
enlisting the participation of our corporations in supporting research at our universities is clearly desirable , but potential corporate partners are not equally available across Canada , or to all institutions . 
it is thus essential that partnership arrangements be supplemented by alternate programs that maximize the benefit and full potential of our post - secondary institutions . 
the final topic on which I shall comment is the fact that not all Canadians can , or wish to , benefit from post - secondary education . 
while we are unquestionably embarked on the information and technology age , Canada will continue in the foreseeable future to rely on a large number of skilled and highly productive artisans , craftsmen , and tradesmen . 
our competitiveness internationally will depend critically on their capacities and adaptability . 
to this end , we must ensure that , as a nation , we provide the best education and training to fully exploit the ingenuity and productivity of all of our vital human resources . 
in many cases , other countries both within and without the G - 7 are doing a much better job than we are in this area . 
other countries are very much aware of this imperative , and Canada is in serious danger of falling behind . 
unfortunately , time did not permit the special committee to concern itself with this broader issue . 
a further special inquiry would be necessary . 
i raise the matter now simply to caution against a too narrow focus on the many problems confronting our system of post - secondary education . 
the problems confronting post - secondary education in Canada at this time are indeed formidable , but fortunately they are not insurmountable , even in a period of still diminished resources . 
overcoming the evident challenges in a fiscally responsible manner will necessitate a strategic plan jointly developed by both the federal and provincial governments . 
this must be used by both to inform and guide their efforts on behalf of post - secondary education . 
i believe the report of the special committee contains much sound advice to assist in the formulation of such a strategic plan . 
i am confident that if our recommendations are adopted and implemented , Canada will emerge with a strengthened post - secondary educational system . 
perhaps , and most important , it will be a system from which the various impediments to entry have been reduced to the limit permitted by our fiscal capacity . 
if we wish to succeed in the new global economy , we must settle for nothing less . 
honourable senators , I wish to ask the honourable senator a question . 
approximately 10 years ago , the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance made a study of the federal participation in the financing of post - secondary education . 
this afternoon , Senator Andreychuk told us that , to a considerable extent , the increasing debt of students attributable to tuition was a result of cuts in the federal transfers to provincial governments . 
when the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance was examining this matter of federal participation in the financing of post - secondary education , the chairman of the council of ministers of education told our committee that the federal government had no role in education within the provinces for the most part , and that this was really a matter of provincial jurisdiction . 
in effect , the minister , who was the minister from Nova Scotia at the time , said , " Look , if you want to send money , fine , but we will spend it as we wish . 
we will use it to pave roads , for welfare programs , et cetera . 
we may choose to spend some of it on post - secondary education . " 
has there been a change in the attitude of the provincial governments so that if the federal government were to increase its transfers , that money would , in fact , be used for the financing of post - secondary education , or does the position of the Minister of Education in Nova Scotia , who was speaking for the council of ministers of education throughout the 10 provinces , still stand ? 
senator Andreychuk : 
this is not an easy question . 
there was a plea from many sectors for national guidelines for the post - secondary education system , similar to those existing within the health system . 
we heard about mobility problems and the feeling that there had to be a federal presence . 
i think there was a resistance by anyone in authority to have the federal presence in a national guideline system . 
this is where they should cooperate and there should be some standardization , but there was no yielding of provincial responsibility to the federal government . 
at the same time , while we say education is a provincial responsibility , we do know that money from the Canada Health and Social Transfer was in fact used in post - secondary education , as I pointed out . 
there have been cut - backs at every level , and there certainly have been cut - backs in the university system . 
we could take the constitutional line , the legal line or the practical line . 
we wanted to appeal to and encourage all governments to take these recommendations . 
it will take all of them within their own area . 
the federal government has played a role and must continue to play a role in post - secondary education . 
if you read the report in its entirety , you will get the flavour of it . 
we are respectful of the Constitutional responsibilities of the provinces , but the future of our children and our grandchildren demands cooperation and demands that we all address this issue as a priority . 
the federal government must play its part , either in traditional ways or in new ways through its responsible areas of control or in combination with the provinces . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak now , we have agreement that the order will remain standing in the name of the Honourable Senator Forest . 
is that agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on behalf of Senator Forest , debate adjourned . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
tenth Report of Committee Presented and Adopted 
leaving having been given to revert to Reports from Standing and Special Committees : 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
tenth REPORT 
whereas Senator Thompson has been found in contempt and suspended from the Senate ; 
and whereas , pursuant to Rule 137 and the Sessional Allowance ( Suspension ) Regulations , his sessional allowance has been suspended for the remainder of the session ; 
and whereas , subsection 63 ( 3 ) of the Parliament of Canada Act provides that the allowance for expenses is " incidental to the discharge of the duties of the member " ; 
be it resolved that : 
senator Thompson not be entitled to receive his expense allowance otherwise payable during the period of his suspension . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Rompkey : 
with leave , now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , would the honourable senator give us an explanation , please ? 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , the report simply removes the tax - free allowance for Senator Thompson . 
he has been suspended from the Senate . 
he has no duties as a senator . 
therefore , he has no need of an expense allowance and , therefore , it has been removed . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Senator Rompkey . 
i take it you have legal opinions to that effect ? 
senator Rompkey : 
yes , we do have legal opinions to that effect . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
eleventh Report of Committee Presented and Adopted 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
eleventh REPORT 
your committee recommends that the Seventh Report of your Committee , adopted by the Senate on December 16 , 1997 , be amended by deleting clause 2 of the report and substituting the following : 
" 2 . 
senator Thompson ' s allowances for travel and telecommunications expenses be suspended ; and " . 
respectfully submitted , 
WILLIAM ROMPKEY 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration , honourable senators ? 
senator Rompkey : 
with leave , now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , this report is designed to remove from Senator Thompson those support services which he had retained under a previous report of the Internal Economy Committee . 
if you recall , we took away all support services from Senator Thompson except the ability to travel from his residence in Ontario to Ottawa . 
that has now been taken away from him through this order . 
it is an amendment of a previous report of the Internal Economy Committee that took away Senator Thompson ' s support services . 
this removes all support services from Senator Thompson . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for my honourable friend . 
when we agreed to the suspension , we were told it would be done for this session . 
does the removal of these allowances , and so forth , apply only for this session or on a more permanent basis ? 
senator Rompkey : 
the order that we made previously has not changed . 
the order still stands . 
this report amends that order . 
it does not speak to the period at all . 
my understanding is that this applies until the end of the session , the period of his suspension . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
the period of his suspension is set out in the tenth report . 
that is quite clear . 
the eleventh report does not speak of a period of suspension in its amendment to the seventh report because at that time we did not know . 
he was a full - fledged sitting member with all the privileges . 
we took the perks away . 
i hope there are no conflicts between this report and what we did earlier . 
it is a question of clarification to make sure we are on the right road . 
senator Rompkey : 
that point is well taken . 
certainly the intent of the report is to conform with the other orders with regard to Senator Thompson . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have been advised in writing that Honourable Senator H é bert is the Acting Deputy Leader of the Senate . 
the Senate adjourned to Tuesday , February 24 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 42 
Tuesday , February 24 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
olympic Winter Games 
memories of 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
international Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims 
olympic Winter Games 
conclusion of 1998 Games at Nagano - Congratulations to Canada ' s Athletes 
tribute 
the Late Kathleen Shannon 
tributes 
black History Month 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
depository Bills and Notes Bill 
report of Committee 
canada Cooperatives Bill 
report of Committee 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
question PERIOD 
health 
cuts to Spending on Medicare - Response of Minister to Criticism - Government Position 
compensation Promised to Victims of Hepatitis C - Government Position 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Effect on Public - Government Position 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Decrease in Quality of Screening Facilities for Breast Cancer - Government Position 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Assurance of Safety of Screening Facilities for Breast Cancer - Government Position 
energy 
implementation of Alternative Fuels Act - Request for Answers to Order Paper Questions 
human Rights 
assistance for Victims of Torture - Possible Increase in Funding - Government Position 
Canadian Heritage 
possible Celebration for Olympic Athletes - Government Position 
Iraq 
aversion of Crisis by Agreement with United Nations Secretary - General - Government Position 
child Custody and Access 
senate Representation on Steering Committee of Special Joint Committee - Question to Joint Chairman 
hiring of Researcher for Special Joint Committee - Request for Particulars of Qualifications - Question to Joint Chairman 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
revenue Canada 
possible Postponement of Income Tax Deadline Dates for Victims of Ice Storm - Government Position 
agriculture 
Razing of Abandoned Grain Elevators on Prairies - Loss of Storage Capacity - Effect on Rural Municipalities - Government Position 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Canada Ports Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Marine Atlantic Inc. - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Montreal Port Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
question of Privilege - Speaker ' s Ruling 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
aboriginal Governance 
consideration of Report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
income Tax Act 
motion Proposing an Amendment - Debate Continued 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , February 24 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
olympic Winter Games 
memories of 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as the Olympic flame burned out at Nagano , it felt great to be a Canadian . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
i think what we ' ll take home from these games is how much that maple leaf is your passport to the world . 
we all have magic memories of golden moments at Nagano . 
we have memories of speed skating medal hauls , and curlers who won gold . 
we have memories of blistering bobsleds , of rock ' n roll snowboarding , and lots of home - grown heroes . 
we have memories of young women flying to gold and skating to silver . 
we have memories of those who worked wonders on ice and snow . 
we have memories of daring and of triumph ; of pain and elation . 
we have memories of the courage of a man called Elvis , and the pure grit of Susan Auch . 
these are athletes loved and envied by millions across the planet ; athletes of the Maple Leaf ; Canadians who understood , as they gazed into the looking - glass of world opinion , as they stared into the reflections of this nation in the world community , that Canada is a place of hope and promise for millions of people the world over , a place of dreams and images of a better world . 
these athletes saw at first hand that the Maple Leaf is our passport to the world , that our strength comes from mutual respect and tolerance , and that we were seen in the looking - glass of world opinion as being a special place ; a compassionate , free society ; a vast federation which is a microcosm of a linked planet - a linked planet which came together in the snowy hills of Nagano under the umbrella of the Olympic Truce . 
honourable senators , today we celebrate the magical hours of the Winter Games and its victories . 
to the people of Nagano , who return to the tranquility of their city , we offer our thanks . 
none of us will forget the images of sumo wrestlers stomping to drive out demons as the games began , of the glorious Ode to Joy and mass choirs and choruses around the world , of starry - night closing ceremonies and flower - laden horses , of floodlights dimming and thousands of paper lanterns becoming a shimmering sea of light . 
most of all , honourable senators , there were the children : children scattering petals and singing in school choirs , huge numbers of children who turned out for every event , cheering and laughing , in the last games of an old millennium and a harbinger of the new . 
there , under the spirit of centuries past , gathered the children of a new Japan . 
they watched , laughed , and blew horns at the athletes . 
as their voices sung out in the stadium of bobbing lights , it became clear that the real gold at Nagano was the promise of a better world and the children who will lead us into it . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
international Rehabilitation Council for Torture Victims 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I rise today to address the other side of humanity , the issue of victims of torture . 
the IRCT is a multilateral organization involved in some 100 countries , and it receives its money from the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture . 
canada is also the home to national organizations that are active in helping these victims . 
until recently , the United States ' contribution was in the order of $ 100,000 U.S. annually . 
in a letter to Senator Angus dated January 9 , 1998 , the Minister of Foreign Affairs stated the following : 
to date , Canada has only made a token contribution to the UN Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture . 
in spite of budget reductions and resource restraints the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade attaches priority to this fund and is actively seeking new resources . 
i have contacted my colleague , the Honourable Diane Marleau , Minister for International Cooperation and Minister responsible for La Francophonie , and have asked that the Canadian International Development Agency examine the possibility of contributing to this fund . 
honourable senators , the intention is there , the words are there , but the actions are not . 
canada must make victims of torture a high priority if we are to regain our traditional high profile in human rights issues . 
canada must make a more determined contribution to ease the plight of victims of government - sanctioned torture throughout the world , particularly in areas where Canada is already actively involved in promoting human rights . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senator , I regret to interrupt you , but your three - minute period has expired . 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i ask all senators to help these victims by urging the government to significantly increase its funding , both multilaterally and bilaterally . 
olympic Winter Games 
conclusion of 1998 Games at Nagano - Congratulations to Canada ' s Athletes 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
honourable senators , I should like to thank the Leader of the Government in the Senate for his very eloquent remarks with respect to the Olympic games . 
as a former minister of sport , I listened very carefully to what he had to say . 
none of these successes would have been possible had it not been for this enormous volunteer effort which took place in all of Canada ' s provinces . 
a chap said to me the other day , " Well , Ray , you know , this particular athlete only finished in sixth place . " 
sixth place out of the entire world ! 
that is a magnificent success , not a failure . 
as to those who did not even get medals , what a contribution they have made to this country . 
the same applies to all those who did not make the team , who stayed behind in Canada , after thousands and thousands of hours of hard work and training during those early morning swim lessons . 
tribute 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , five years ago today Prime Minister Brian Mulroney announced he would be resigning as Prime Minister and Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party . 
there is no doubt that he and the government he led greatly altered the course of Canada . 
fundamental , radical changes took place during his stewardship . 
history will no doubt properly credit him and his government for their courage and foresight , initiatives such as the free trade agreement with the United States and NAFTA , abolishing the 13.5 - per - cent manufacturers sales tax and introducing the 7 - per - cent GST consumption tax to spur exports . 
also , his government eliminated the Foreign Investment Review Agency , or FIRA , abolished the National Energy Program , privatized Crown corporations such as Teleglobe , Air Canada , Canadair , de Havilland , and began the process for Petro - Canada . 
as well , a revamped patent act was introduced to strengthen the pharmaceutical industry to attract new investment to Canada . 
these are but a few of the achievements . 
an operating deficit of $ 16 billion a year was transformed into a $ 6.6 billion surplus . 
as a percentage of GDP , the federal deficit was virtually cut in half , from 8.7 per cent in 1984 to 4.6 per cent in 1990 - 91 . 
the worldwide recession took a serious toll on that number , but public finances were still left in a position significantly stronger than what Mr. Mulroney and his government found . 
by the time he left office in June of 1993 , employment in Canada was up 1.4 million jobs from the September 1984 level . 
that was the Canada Brian Mulroney turned over to his successors almost five years ago . 
on this fifth anniversary of his announcement , coinciding as it does with the date of the 1998 Budget of Paul Martin , I wish to end my remarks by congratulating the present government for keeping all the aforementioned policies in place , the results of which I am sure we will hear about and witness later today . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to inform the Senate that the 15 - minute period allocated for Senators ' Statements has expired . 
is leave granted to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Late Kathleen Shannon 
tributes 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , it was with great regret and profound sorrow that we learned in January of the death of Kathleen Shannon from lung cancer . 
Ms Shannon , one of the first filmmakers of the National Film Board , founded the famous Studio D . Her friends and colleagues always considered her a visionary of courageous leadership , a filmmaker , a feminist of the first order and an individual who guided her contemporaries with a keen intellect and a deep and steadfast commitment to the role of women in society . 
the press release issued by the National Film Board tells us the following : 
her strong views on feminism were firmly in place long before the feminist movement made itself felt . 
in 1974 , she established Studio D , the women ' s studio , with the mandate to make films by , for and about women . 
according to filmmaker Terre Nash ( If You Love This Planet ) : 
if the front door was closed to women filmmakers , she would let us in the back door . 
if the back door was closed , she would let us in through the windows . 
Kathleen headed the ground - breaking studio for 12 years and oversaw the production of about 100 films , including Oscar winners I ' ll Find A Way , If You Love This Planet and Flamenco at 5:15 . 
Barbara James , Director General of the National Film Board ' s English Program , notes that Kathleen " had an enormous impact on the development of women ' s filmmaking , both inside and outside the NFB . 
she had an unshakable conviction in the uniqueness of women ' s experience and was determined to see that life experience reflected on the screen . 
the proof of her success is that many of the things she fought for are now accepted and self - evident . " 
the Canadian government awarded Kathleen Shannon the Order of Canada in 1986 . 
to enable us to appreciate the ideological heritage left by this great filmmaker , director Gerry Rogers and producer Signe Johansson recently produced a film entitled Kathleen Shannon in Kathleen Shannon : on Film , Feminism and Other Dreams . 
on behalf of all women in Canada , I would like to thank her for her lasting gift to us and to pay tribute to her courage in drawing attention to the violence , injustice and inequality faced by women in this country . 
to her family and her friends we offer our sympathy and our profound appreciation . 
black History Month 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I rise to bring to the attention of honourable senators the observance of Black History Month in Canada during the month of February . 
black History Month began in 1926 in the United States when renowned Black educator Carter G . Woodson proposed a Negro history week . 
he felt that mainstream history textbooks ignored the positive accomplishments of African Americans , and that the only way to celebrate this rich culture was to move outside the normal curriculum . 
black History Month has been celebrated in Canada since 1970 . 
since its inception , Black History Month has provided our community with an annual opportunity to meet , reflect and share with each other a vision of the community . 
February was the time chosen to celebrate this period , as it included the birthdays of Fredrick Douglass , a slavery abolitionist and great orator , as well as Abraham Lincoln . 
the Canadian black community has suffered from the same lack of recognition in school books , school curricula and anthologies , et cetera . 
the positive accomplishments of our community in Canada have received scant , if any , recognition . 
names of outstanding individuals such as Thomas Peters , James Robinson Johnston , Anne Packwood , Richard Preston , Harry Gairey and Don Moore remain unknown , not only within the black community but to most Canadians . 
this past month has been most rewarding . 
my message to the students was one of hope for a better world , a better Canada - one free of racism - as they begin their journey towards adulthood . 
on Saturday last , I joined with Mayor Mary Pitt of Nepean for the official launch of Nepean ' s African History Week , the first time such an event has been held in that city . 
i addressed the assembly on the importance of the event in the African - Canadian population of the Ottawa - Carleton region . 
i stressed the importance that all Canadians must place on preserving Canada ' s humanitarian traditions . 
today I fear that this reputation is in jeopardy , as politicians respond to media attacks on new immigrants and refugees with more and more restrictive regulations . 
on Sunday in Montreal , I was the keynote speaker at celebrations hosted by the Centre for Research Action on Race Relations and the Congress of Black Women . 
i outlined the importance of protecting , preserving and promoting black history and culture , and I suggested that they use the Society for the Preservation of Black Culture in Nova Scotia as an example of what could be achieved in the Montreal area . 
i also addressed the importance of understanding and responding to the poor results reported in the latest Report on Employment Equity in the Federal Public Service . 
i also reviewed the recently released recommendations to change the Immigration Act and how many sections impact negatively on the visible minority community in Canada . 
next month , I have been asked to speak to students at Simon Fraser University on the black experience in Canada . 
today I encourage all Canadians to join with us in the celebration of Black History Month . 
let knowledge and understanding triumph over ignorance and intolerance . 
help us build bridges between our communities . 
this will surely make Canada a better place in which to live . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 , at one thirty o ' clock in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , with respect to this type of notice of motion relating to the hour of sitting on Wednesday , would the government side be open to the suggestion that , at the beginning of the session tomorrow , there might be a house order to the effect that at 3:15 p.m. , His Honour will rise , and it will be deemed that this motion is placed before us for consideration ? 
in other words , at 3:15 p.m. , His Honour will rise and say , " The motion to adjourn has been placed before us . " 
perhaps that would get us around the problem that we have been experiencing recently on Wednesdays . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , certainly this side would be delighted if there was an order which would allow some rigour in terms of enforcing the ability to hold committee hearings at 3:15 p.m. , as planned . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , perhaps Senator Kinsella would explain his suggestion . 
would my honourable friend be prepared to use three o ' clock instead of 3:15 p.m. as his time specific ? 
second , as I understand it , his proposal is that at a certain hour - and he mentioned 3:15 p.m. - the Speaker would put the adjournment question . 
under those circumstances that would be a debatable motion . 
if so , we might then go on for an hour or an hour and a half - depending on what we could smuggle into that debate . 
that would not be an exempt , routine motion , as I understand it , but a debatable motion . 
senator Kinsella : 
i was trying to get around the problems we have been experiencing on Wednesdays . 
i have not researched this matter to the extent that I should have done concerning whether this particular technique would be appropriate . 
therefore , I simply raise it as an indication of the goodwill on this side to achieve the objective that I think is a common objective . 
perhaps we could reflect upon that , or perhaps identify some other technique . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
depository Bills and Notes Bill 
report of Committee 
leave Having Been Given to Revert to Presentation of Reports from Standing or Special Committees : 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck , for Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , February 24 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
seventh REPORT 
your committee , to which was referred the Bill S - 9 , An Act respecting depository bills and depository notes and to amend the Financial Administration Act , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated Friday , December 12 , 1997 , and now reports the same with the following amendment : 
page 5 , clause 17 : replacing line 36 with the following : 
" makes final and irrevocable payment of the amounts owing to the clearing house " 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Callbeck , for Senator Kirby , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
canada Cooperatives Bill 
report of Committee 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck , for Hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , February 24 , 1997 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
eighth REPORT 
your committee , to which was referred the Bill C - 5 , An Act respecting cooperatives , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated Tuesday , December 16 , 1997 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that in the tabling of documents from committees , the presentation of the report is done by either the chairman of the committee or the vice - chairman . 
i may be wrong in this , but I saw the chairman of the committee , and I also know that the vice - chairman is in the Senate . 
why is this report not being presented by either the chairman or the vice - chairman ? 
senator Callbeck : 
honourable senators , Senator Kirby could not be here , and so he asked me to table these reports this afternoon . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , in the absence of the chairman , then automatically the vice - chairman of a standing Senate committee should be presenting its reports . 
i would not want what has happened today to become a precedent . 
however , we will accept the tabling of the report today , as it is here . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Callbeck , for Senator Kirby , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I proceed to the next item on the Order Paper , I should like to introduce to you the Pages who are on the regular exchange program with us from the House of Commons . 
with us today is Katherine Telford , who is in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Ottawa . 
her major is in political science . 
Katherine is from Toronto . 
honourable senators , to my right is Craig Rice of Maple Ridge , British Columbia , who is studying arts at the University of Ottawa . 
( 1440 ) 
question PERIOD 
health 
cuts to Spending on Medicare - Response of Minister to Criticism - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , on February 19 , the Minister of Health was asked whether this Liberal government would stand up for medicare and ensure that no more deaths occurred as a result of emergency line - ups and cut - backs in hospitals , to which he responded : 
if the hon. member would pay more attention to the facts than the characteristically empty rhetoric of the NDP , we would be a lot further ahead . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would never characterize anything as empty rhetoric unless perhaps I were on the hustings . 
i certainly would not do so in this chamber . 
the fact of the matter is that there has been increased spending on health care in our home province of Nova Scotia , and as has been indicated by the premier , that will continue . 
senator Oliver : 
does the Leader of the Government admit that as a result of this Liberal government ' s cuts to medical transfer payments , patients across the country are bearing the brunt of Ottawa ' s efforts to balance the budget ? 
earlier today I received a phone call from a senior citizen in Nova Scotia complaining about being put out of hospitals because of lack of services . 
what is to be done ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the federal government and governments at all levels in all provinces are looking for a more efficient use of the tax dollar with respect to health care . 
compensation Promised to Victims of Hepatitis C - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last week , on February 20 , the Minister of Health was asked whether the federal government would act unilaterally to resolve the issue of compensation for sufferers of hepatitis C . In response to the question , the minister stated : 
... no one would be happier than I with a compensation package for Hepatitis C victims who are after all bearing , notwithstanding their innocence , the consequences of this tragedy . 
and : 
... this government will not walk away from its responsibilities and at the end of the day will discharge those responsibilities . 
at least 30,000 of our fellow Canadians are suffering from the effects of hepatitis C . Would the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell the Canadian public whether this government is ready yet to unilaterally provide compensation to these people ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as my honourable friend knows , meetings were held in the past ten days in Toronto between the federal Minister of Health and provincial ministers of health . 
that matter was one of the subjects of discussion . 
senator Atkins : 
if the government is unwilling to act in a unilateral fashion at this time , would Senator Graham indicate when it will consider such action as a measure of responsibility to the Canadian public , and why it continues to stall in its resolution of this pressing issue ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I do not believe that I indicated that the government has ruled out acting unilaterally , but , as in all cases , it would certainly follow the negotiating route first , which , it is hoped , would be most successful for Canadians in every province . 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Effect on Public - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
on February 17 , the front page of The Winnipeg Sun carried the following captions : 
patients are being left in the hallways of many city emergency wards - some for up to a week . 
health - care cut - backs are being blamed for the crunch in available beds . 
hospitals often divert ambulances to other hospitals to deal with overcrowding . 
one woman left in a hallway got an acute care bed only after suffering heart failure . 
as a result of this government ' s severe and Draconian cut - backs to transfer payments to the provinces for health care , the Canadian public is suffering as never before . 
as health care spending cuts begin to take their true toll on the people of Canada , this federal government continues to tell the public that things are improving ; " Don ' t worry , be happy . " 
what is happening in Winnipeg is not an isolated incident . 
people are suffering from a lack of federal funds to health care . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should hope that Senator Stratton will also address that question to the Government of Manitoba . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
my understanding is that the Government of Manitoba , to its credit , has a budget surplus and that it has chosen not to direct any of that surplus to the improvement of health care facilities in the province . 
rather , it has put it away for its rainy day treasury board , which , in itself , is commendable . 
at the same time , I think we should look directly at where the responsibility lies , and that is with the Government of Manitoba . 
senator Stratton : 
honourable senators , is this not called buck passing ? 
where does the buck stop ? 
is it not with the leader and his government ? 
senator Carstairs : 
it is true . 
senator Stratton : 
can the leader tell me why , in spite of the new CHST flow of $ 12.5 billion , transfer payments to Manitoba for health , education and social assistance will fall by another $ 12 million over the next five years ? 
senator Graham : 
that is exactly not true . 
senator Stratton : 
if the leader is saying no , could he at least tell me why and give me the background on the " no " ? 
senator Graham : 
my honourable friend knows that the cash flow for health has been raised to $ 12.5 billion , and that will mean an increase of several billion dollars to each of the provinces over the next several years . 
senator Stratton : 
i do not believe you . 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Decrease in Quality of Screening Facilities for Breast Cancer - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
as a result of federal government cut - backs in transfer payments to the provinces , health care facilities have suffered tremendously . 
according to this report , half of the 338 clinics do not meet standards . 
the problem is that the survey did not specify which facilities were substandard . 
women who called the Breast Cancer Society of Canada expressed fear and shock that these facilities are not regulated by national standards of quality . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a very valid suggestion raised by Honourable Senator LeBreton . 
i am pleased that the honourable senators opposite are raising so many health issues because they are important to all Canadians , and we should all be more cognizant of the need for the best possible health care delivery system in this country , and one that is fair and open on an equal basis to all Canadians . 
with respect to the cash flow , the Canada Health and Social Transfers to the provinces have gone from $ 11 billion to $ 12.5 billion . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
what were they three years ago ? 
senator Graham : 
this means that close to $ 7 billion in additional money over six years goes to the provinces to fund health care , post - secondary education and social assistance . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is not what the provinces are saying . 
senator LeBreton : 
i hope that some of those funds go to address the very serious problem of breast cancer . 
cut - backs in Transfer Payments to Provinces - Assurance of Safety of Screening Facilities for Breast Cancer - Government Position 
hon. Margory LeBreton : 
women across Canada , as well as the clinics involved , would like to be assured of the safety of their own various facilities . 
will the minister ask his colleague in the other place to take steps to inform those facilities which were found to be below standard ? 
will he determine how to communicate this information to the clinics and to the women who would be in need of the services of these specific clinics ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the reduction in public sector health care expenditures is as a result of restructuring , as my honourable friends opposite know . 
this restructuring in the provincial health care programs is designed to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Canadian health care programs . 
i spoke about increasing the cash flow to $ 12.5 billion annually , starting in 1997 - 98 . 
i should mention as well that the total CHST transfers , including cash and tax points , are now more than $ 25.2 billion a year , and will rise in 1998 - 99 . 
as a result , we hope that a stable , predictable funding plan will result . 
at the same time , I acknowledge the important points which have been raised by Senator LeBreton , and I certainly will bring them to the attention of those most responsible . 
energy 
implementation of Alternative Fuels Act - Request for Answers to Order Paper Questions 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
as many of you are aware , I have had a series of questions on the Order Paper since approximately May of 1997 . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i know the feeling . 
senator Kenny : 
i do not know how long it takes for the government to answer simple , straightforward questions . 
these are not difficult questions . 
these are not complicated questions . 
they have to do with a bill that originated in this house . 
does your minister use an alternative fuel ? 
none of these are difficult questions . 
yet the government seems to have extraordinary difficulty in providing answers . 
could the Leader of the Government please tell me how many more months it will be before I receive answers to these 13 questions ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am thankful for the reminder . 
we shall take action today . 
human Rights 
assistance for Victims of Torture - Possible Increase in Funding - Government Position 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I direct my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in connection with the subject - matter that I raised in my statement earlier , while Canada was instrumental in creating the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture in 1981 , the Canadian contribution has been woefully low , and nowhere close to matching the growing needs of the international fund and its activities undertaken to assist victims of torture . 
however , other countries are now coming forward . 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs appears to have recognized the need to attach a priority to the funding of assistance for victims of torture , and to be actively seeking new resources through the Minister of International Cooperation . 
will the Leader of the Government explain to members of this chamber why cabinet does not appear to have taken a decision on this matter , and why the Prime Minister has not been vocal on this important human rights issue ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government : 
honourable senators , I agree that this is an important human rights issue . 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs is an advocate for these very important causes . 
in fact , he himself has brought them forward on a number of occasions . 
he is very sensitive to the problems faced by those around the world who are less well - off , particularly those who are victims of torture and terror . 
i assure my honourable friend that I will bring her representations to the attention of my colleagues , and most especially the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs . 
senator Andreychuk : 
there is a growing unease in some sectors of Canada that the commission ' s work is not getting the high priority that it once did from both the cabinet and the Prime Minister . 
will the government undertake to make an announcement of increased funds and thereby show support to the valuable work that is being done in Geneva on behalf of victims of torture as a complement to our very valuable work in land - mines ? 
senator Graham : 
i believe that the Honourable Senator Andreychuk ' s representations are very timely . 
certainly the report of the annual meeting of the Human Rights Commission will be taken very seriously . 
i will endeavour to bring her representations to the attention of those most responsible as forcefully as I possibly can . 
Canadian Heritage 
possible Celebration for Olympic Athletes - Government Position 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , although I missed Senators ' Statements , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate relating to his very eloquent and appropriate statement about the performace of our athletes at the Olympic Winter Games in Japan . 
like Senator Perrault , I would pay tribute to those capable Canadians who did us so proud . 
while I do not wish to take away anything from those who won medals , I would make special mention of " the Great One " because he was there when the team suffered defeat . 
he was there proudly representing Canada , and he was part of the team . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator St. Germain : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government : 
i must acknowledge that Senator St. Germain is a pretty good stickhandler himself for getting in his tribute to " the Great One . " 
it is to be hoped that the Government of Canada will act at the appropriate time in this matter . 
perhaps a good time would be when the New York Rangers are next in town to meet the Ottawa Senators . 
as Senator Perrault appropriately reminded us , the parents of these athletes have sacrificed so much . 
it was heart - warming to see so many parents of the participants at the site , watching their children compete . 
senator Callbeck spoke of Mr. MacEachern from Prince Edward Island and the wonderful , warm conversation that he had with his mother by way of satellite television from Nagano to Prince Edward Island . 
those are the things that bring us closer together and make us so proud to be Canadian . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
Iraq 
aversion of Crisis by Agreement with United Nations Secretary - General - Government Position 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , on Tuesday , February 17 , the Honourable Senator Grafstein invited us to put forward our thoughts on Canadian policy on the crisis in Iraq . 
i will do so with great honour and pleasure in due time . 
however , I should first like to say that I am sure all members rejoice in the success , so far , of the mission of the Secretary - General of the United Nations , who succeeded in averting a terrible crisis in the Middle East . 
i am sure honourable senators are listening silently , and that they do not disagree . 
i certainly do not hear any disagreement . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Prud ' homme : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am aware that the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Mr. Axworthy , spoke to U.S. Secretary of State Albright yesterday , and he was to speak with the Foreign Ministers of the United Kingdom and of France . 
i do not know if those two conversations have taken place . 
as honourable senators may be aware , the UN Security Council was briefed by Secretary - General Annan this morning . 
we are all aware of the deal which would ensure that UNSCOM has unrestricted and unlimited access to all sites in Iraq , including presidential sites . 
however , further deals must be clarified , and they will probably be forthcoming later this day . 
child Custody and Access 
senate Representation on Steering Committee of Special Joint Committee - Question to Joint Chairman 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Joint Chairman of the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access . 
senate representation and participation in the decision - making of joint parliamentary committees is a matter of abiding concern to the Senate and to senators . 
hon. Landon Pearson : 
honourable senators , the steering committee , which was set up by the whole committee , was established to represent all parties and the Senate . 
generally speaking , there are one or two senators on it . 
it depends on how the parties have chosen to represent themselves on the steering committee . 
that is the way in which it was set up . 
it is not the decision - making body of the committee . 
it is simply the group that comes together to bring forward ideas to the committee as a whole , on which seven senators and 16 members of Parliament sit . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I think the senator has misunderstood me . 
senator Pearson : 
at the moment , most meetings of the steering committee consist of seven people , and most of the time there have been two senators present . 
senator Cools : 
are the two senators , then , members of the committee ? 
senator Pearson : 
Yes. 
senator Cools : 
senator Pearson : 
each time the senators are there , they are members of the committee . 
senator Cools : 
then is the steering committee not a fixed group ? 
in other words , is the membership of the steering committee not a fixed number , so that if I were to go to the steering committee meeting tomorrow , I could become a member ? 
senator Pearson : 
the membership of the steering committee was fixed by agreement of the whole committee at seven . 
senator Cools : 
and of that number , how many are senators ? 
senator Pearson : 
sometimes one and sometimes two . 
hiring of Researcher for Special Joint Committee - Request for Particulars of Qualifications - Question to Joint Chairman 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , it is quite extraordinary . 
yesterday , at a committee meeting , the committee was informed that an additional researcher had already been hired at a pay rate of $ 550 per day for a term of 90 days . 
my further question to the Joint Chairman of that committee is : 
what was the selection process that was used to hire this person ? 
how many candidates were considered for the position ? 
why was the curriculum vitae of this individual not circulated to committee members ? 
last , but not least , what are the credentials and the qualifications of this individual ? 
hon. Landon Pearson : 
honourable senators , that is a fairly extensive question which I cannot answer at this time . 
i would need to write down the particulars of it . 
the joint chairmen were given authority by the committee as a whole to hire the necessary staff . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 10 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Marjory LeBreton , regarding the possible postponement of income tax deadline dates for victims of the ice storm , and I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 12 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Mira Spivak , regarding the razing of abandoned grain elevators on the Prairies . 
revenue Canada 
possible Postponement of Income Tax Deadline Dates for Victims of Ice Storm - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Marjory LeBreton on February 10 , 1998 ) 
the Government is very conscious of the numerous financial burdens the ice storm has created . 
fact , the Minister of National Revenue issued a news release to this effect on February 18 , 1998 . This News Release has been tabled in the Senate . 
although it has not been possible for The Department of National Revenue to stop the calculation of interest for clients in the most affected areas , The Minister has invited anyone who receives a statement or notice in the mail that includes an interest charge to contact their local Revenue Canada office , or the Department ' s toll - free ice storm information line . 
the Department is committed to reviewing each request and , where appropriate , making any necessary adjustments . 
the Government is pleased to offer measures to help those most affected by the ice storm to get back on their feet . 
agriculture 
Razing of Abandoned Grain Elevators on Prairies - Loss of Storage Capacity - Effect on Rural Municipalities - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on February 12 , 1998 ) 
the federal government appreciates the frustration that many producers are feeling with respect to the consolidation of the grain handling system on the prairies . 
it is important to note , however , that the decision to build and / or consolidate the grain elevator system in Canada is not taken by any level of government but by the companies in question . 
consolidation has been occurring in response to market demands to find more efficient and cost - effective means to move prairie grain to the customer . 
in addition to the larger high throughput elevators being built and planned by the various grain companies , producers have also been joining together to build their own high throughput facilities throughout Saskatchewan . However , expropriation of private property , as suggested by some , is most likely not the most effective way to deal with this issue . 
this being said , one way to help address rural depopulation is to create an economic environment where value - added initiatives can be initiated which generates new employment for our young people . 
the economic impact of value - added facilities can offset the loss of the infrastructure in the grain handling system . 
a more efficient grain handling system is also an important component in providing farmers with the necessary resources to pursue value - added activities to strengthen our rural communities . 
the federal government is aware of the social and economic concerns of rural Canadians and will continue to work with them and other rural stakeholders to address these concerns . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Canada Ports Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 8 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Marine Atlantic Inc. - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 29 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Montreal Port Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 30 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Bill 
question of Privilege - Speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call for Orders of the Day , I wish to proceed with a Speaker ' s ruling that has been in abeyance for some time . 
there are copies available . 
i would ask the Pages to distribute them to all honourable senators . 
on Thursday , December 17 , Senator Tkachuk and then Senator Kinsella claimed that a breach of privilege had occurred as a result of the premature release of certain information related to Bill C - 2 , an Act to establish the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board , while it was still before the Senate . 
as I indicated at the time , because both questions of privilege dealt with the same question , I decided to consider them together . 
speaking first , Senator Tkachuk said that the government had shown contempt for Parliament in general , and the Senate and its members in particular , by making available on its web site CPP premium deduction tables as recently as December 10 , prior to the passage of Bill C - 2 . 
this occurred despite the fact that Senator Tkachuk had received a declaration from the government , in the form of a delayed response on December 4 , that it did not intend to release such information until the Senate had completed its consideration of the bill . 
honourable senators , in making his case , Senator Tkachuk acknowledged the likelihood that the dissemination of this material was inadvertent . 
at the core of Senator Tkachuk ' s argument is the claim that 
... being deliberately misled by the Government of Canada in relation to a bill which we are in the process of debating is an interference with my parliamentary duties and fundamentally and detrimentally affects my rights and the rights of all senators to discharge our duties as members of the Senate . 
according to her , this was a mistake and there was no intent to make it public . 
revenue Canada , she said , had corrected the error and had apologized . 
in a second intervention , following the statement of Senator Kinsella , Senator Carstairs added that the draft formulae were prepared under the authority of the Minister of National Revenue in preparation for the possible passage of Bill C - 2 . 
she reiterated her position that the hard copy distribution of the information would have been inappropriate before the bill was enacted . 
senator Carstairs also accepted the position that the information should not have appeared on the Internet without the disclaimer which was subsequently attached . 
at this point , Senator Taylor joined in with some comments . 
while recognizing that it is annoying to be taken for granted , he asked what genuine remedy might be available in this case . 
citing article 47 of our rules , he suggested that it would be futile to raise this issue as a question of privilege unless the Senate has the power to provide a remedy . 
reading some citations from Beauchesne , he then raised the notion of intent ; that is , whether the actions of the government in this instance were deliberately untrue and improper . 
the arguments then turned to the question of whether the material on the Internet site constituted a publication . 
as to the disclaimer , the Leader of the Opposition explained that it , and I quote : 
... came in a hurry after they were found to be not only irregularly and prematurely published , but in contempt of Parliament . 
this action , he maintained , affected the rights and privileges of all senators and members of the House . 
according to him , and I quote : 
this information or any information should not appear and be distributed , even if it is regarded as instructions , before any bill is given Royal Assent . 
first , I want to make it clear that even though notices of these questions of privilege were provided on December 11 , and the arguments were not presented before December 17 , the Senate did agree to postpone them for several days . 
therefore , I will not be assessing the questions of privilege with respect to whether or not they were raised at the first opportunity , as is required under rule 43 . 
i will take it as given that they were raised at the first opportunity . 
as well , these questions of privilege are not affected in any way by the fact that Bill C - 2 was passed by the Senate unamended on December 18 , 1997 and enacted the same day . 
to my mind , these subsequent actions do not mitigate in any way the claims made by Senator Tkachuk and Senator Kinsella . 
in making my decision , I confined myself to the arguments that were presented and to the circumstances then prevailing with respect to the Senate ' s consideration of Bill C - 2 . 
my role as Speaker is to determine whether there is sufficient evidence prima facie to permit a motion to be presented immediately for debate to refer the matter to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
in this case , the action complained of - the premature release on the Internet site of CPP withholding tables - is in the nature of a contempt rather than any violation of parliamentary privilege such as freedom of speech or freedom from arrest or molestation . 
while contempt is not as precisely defined as privilege , it is a serious matter when it occurs because it can infringe the authority of Parliament or the rights of parliamentarians to carry out their duties . 
certainly this is what is alleged in the complaint raised by Senator Tkachuk and Senator Kinsella . 
with respect to the question whether these payroll deduction tables were a publication when they were only available on an Internet site , I think the answer is clear . 
it is a publication . 
even though it was true that the material was not published in printed form , it is impossible to disregard the impact of computer technology which allows information to be available far and wide . 
there is no option but to accept the proposition that by putting the payroll deduction tables on a publicly accessible Internet site , they were to all intents and purposes published and distributed . 
of greater importance or significance than the matter of the publication of this information is the question that Senator Taylor raised with respect to intent . 
in order for the Speaker to rule that a prima facie case has been made in this particular instance , I need to be reasonably satisfied that there was a deliberate attempt on the part of Revenue Canada to show disrespect to Parliament and the Senate when this document was loaded onto the Internet . 
there must also be some evidence that this action was undertaken with the purpose of deceiving or misleading the Senate as it deliberated on Bill C - 2 . 
in addition , there must be some indication as to how this action interfered with the work of senators . 
on each of these points , I do not believe that a sufficient case has been made . 
in presenting his arguments , Senator Tkachuk twice acknowledged that the premature release of the CPP premium declaration tables was probably inadvertent . 
more to the point , perhaps , Revenue Canada recognized its error and , based on the letter tabled by the Deputy Leader of the Government , took some steps to rectify it . 
in a letter stamped December 16 , Mr. Burpee , an assistant deputy minister of Revenue Canada , explained why the tables were prepared in advance . 
he also noted that a " disclaimer " had subsequently been attached to the 1998 tables stating that the bill was currently before the Senate and will become law if it is passed . 
such evidence does not suggest that there was any deliberate attempt on the part of the department to deceive Parliament or to prevent it from doing its work . 
indeed , had the Senate decided to amend the bill in any relevant way , it would have been the task of Revenue Canada to adjust its tables as required . 
that being said , I would remind honourable senators of the words spoken by Senator Carstairs , who told us that this episode was a mistake and that it should not have happened . 
it is a fact that laws cannot be enacted until they have passed both Houses . 
it is all the more objectionable in this case because Revenue Canada had confirmed in writing that it would not make any information available until the bill had become law . 
while I am prepared to accept that no contempt appears to have been committed , I find the actions of the department inexcusable . 
nevertheless , based on the representations made to me on December 17 , I do not find that a sufficient prima facie case has been made . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I would like to raise a point of order . 
i think this is the appropriate time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Speaker ' s decisions may not be appealed . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
no , I would never invoke a point of order regarding the Speaker ' s decision . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
you may appeal , but the decisions are not subject to discussion . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , this may be a very small point , but it is very important . 
Canadians hear repeatedly " members of the House of Commons " and " members of the Senate . " 
even in our deliberations today I heard someone say , " It was attended by members of Parliament and two or three senators . " 
we are all members of Parliament . 
the press keeps repeating what sometimes we ourselves say : 
that there are two groups to consider here , Members of Parliament and senators . 
i remember a travelling delegation composed of ten members of Parliament and three senators . 
that was not right . 
there should always be so many members from the House of Commons and so many members of the Senate . 
i object . 
i am a member of Parliament , and I am proud to be in the Senate . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Taylor , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill C - 4 , to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to speak on this bill , not because there is so much controversy about it but because it is a very important bill in Western Canada , especially in the Prairie provinces and a small part of western Ontario . 
as honourable senators know , agriculture has been a very important part of the strength of this country , and it is most important that we do not see the pillars of agriculture breaking down . 
it was Sir Leonard Tilley who said : " Destroy the farm , and grass will grow in the streets of every city in the nation . " 
in the past few years , many important agricultural decisions have been made that are breaking down agriculture . 
there are many areas that require change . 
i have not seen so much controversy over a bill as has been generated by this bill since the debate on the so - called " Crow rate . " 
that was the longest debate in the House of Commons , with the exception of a fisheries debate in 1918 . 
why all the controversy about this bill ? 
first , we must look at what is happening in agriculture . 
i will give you a couple of examples . 
in 1972 , a barrel of oil was worth $ 2 ; today , the price has gone up to $ 16 , although that price has deflated somewhat in the past few months . 
somehow , the ground has shifted . 
i attended a very interesting , informal dinner with Alvin Hamilton , who has been a great supporter of agriculture for years . 
he had a guest with him at a round table in the Centre Block , a doctor from Austria . 
the question of subsidies arose . 
the doctor said , " You Americans " - he called us Americans - " do not understand food and hunger . " 
he said , " I have seen hunger three times in my lifetime , and you take food for granted . " 
perhaps we are taking food for granted . 
i happen to think we do . 
i follow very closely the work of the Canadian Food Grains Bank which does an excellent job of getting grain to countries in need around the world . 
it is a great program - one of the best . 
a farmer gives a bushel of wheat and the government meets it two to one . 
we have a responsibility to the farmers in those countries , and we have a responsibility to agriculture . 
why all the controversy ? 
with respect to the Crow debate and the trade debate , the whole facet of agriculture in Western Canada has changed . 
we are now talking about a third of the cost of a bushel of wheat to pay the freight rates to transport the bushel to Vancouver or Thunder Bay . 
that is a tremendous increase . 
what is happening on the Prairies ? 
the feed industry is changing . 
provincial governments have major problems with roads , with highways , with transportation , and have not met those challenges . 
some senators will remember the name Charlie Mayer . 
i do not wish to be too political , but Charlie Mayer said it would take $ 7.6 billion to implement the transition in freight rates for the farmers and the municipalities . 
what did we get ? 
we got $ 1.6 billion . 
this transition has created many problems and many frustrations . 
one of the reasons is that grain prices , particularly wheat prices , are low because of increased freight rates . 
because of the freight rates , it was decided that we must feed more hogs , more chickens and more cattle on the Prairies . 
you may be familiar with the situation in Brandon . 
maple Leaf Foods is moving a plant to Brandon . 
i understand that within a few miles of Brandon are some 15 major hog productions . 
these are major changes - and quick changes . 
Iowa beef producers bought out Lakeside . 
they were producing 40,000 head of cattle , and they are now feeding 80,000 head . 
i could say more about the cost of production . 
i phoned Weyburn , Saskatchewan , on the weekend when I was home to get a hub for a disker . 
it would take a 300 - bushel truckload of wheat to buy a little hub for my disker . 
what do you do in that situation ? 
you try to find one on an old machine somewhere , just to keep your machine going , because it makes no sense to give away a truckload of wheat for one little repair if you can possibly fix it some other way . 
why all the controversy about a bill like this ? 
well , a bill like this is very important . 
i wish to address some of the issues in the bill that are of great concern to farmers . 
first , it changes the Wheat Board from a Crown corporation to a corporation . 
i do not see any big problem with that . 
there is some importance in changing it to a corporation to deal with the international trading situation that we face , and possibly we can even gain better cooperation from our American neighbours in this situation . 
some groups are very much opposed to this change . 
they say , " You are breaking down the Canadian Wheat Board . " 
people on both sides of the fence with regard to this bill , and no one is supporting it wholeheartedly . 
many are against it for different reasons - not only farmers but also organized farm groups . 
the coalition against Bill C - 4 , made up of 13 different groups , is very much opposed to the inclusion clause . 
exactly what is the inclusion clause ? 
the inclusion clause would mean that the Canadian Wheat Board , given a vote by farmers , would have the right to include all other grains , except the ones that are now included , namely , wheat , barley and durum wheat . 
today , canola is worth $ 9 a bushel . 
you can make it on $ 9 canola , but you can not make it on $ 3 wheat . 
many of the farmers are nervous that somehow the Wheat Board may not be able to get the prices they have been getting from selling directly into the United States or to other companies that are exporting to Japan , or wherever . 
you can understand why there is that nervousness . 
i personally have some trouble with it . 
i think that inclusion clause is a serious matter . 
some will say that the inclusion balances things , that you have an exclusion clause and an inclusion clause , and you have a vote by the farmers . 
what about that vote ? 
how is the question worded ? 
who gets to vote ? 
is it only those who have produced , for example , canola for the last five years , or does everyone get a vote ? 
the inclusion and exclusion clause has become a subject of great concern . 
this one issue is probably more cause for concern than any other problems people are having with the bill . 
in fairness , at the last minute , the minister introduced an amendment that may give some clarification to this whole situation . 
that might be something that the Senate committee could consider . 
i would favour that , but some thought must be given to the inclusion factor . 
honourable senators , there is also the cash buy - back issue . 
i will try to explain it to you , but I am not sure I fully understand it . 
the Wheat Board can buy 25,000 bushels of grain from a farmer and sell it to a pasta plant that might be built , for example , in Crosby , North Dakota . 
Canadian farmers are looking at building one there and in Swift Current . 
they could do an individual buy - out . 
many people are opposed to that . 
why ? 
they say that it breaks down the pooling and that it is just the beginning of dual marketing . 
again , we are facing a world that is changing . 
we have a global economy and that raises the whole question of other marketing boards . 
in Saskatchewan , for example , the chicken industry has less than 3 per cent of the quota for Canada . 
in fact , it is quite a bit less . 
we have all this feed because of freight rates . 
how do you feed it to chickens for which you have no quota nor access to a global market ? 
it is impossible . 
there must be changes . 
apparently , any province can opt in or out of the marketing board . 
Saskatchewan might opt out in order to have more opportunity to access the global market . 
that makes sense . 
you cannot raise only the amount of chickens that the people of Saskatchewan can eat . 
there are only approximately 900,000 of us . 
the point I am making is that it is a changing world out there and some changes must occur . 
in all fairness , I believe that the minister has tried to meet some of these concerns , but no one is happy with what is happening , whether they are on the left or on the right side of the issue . 
so much for the cash buy - back . 
many are concerned about the pools breaking down , particularly the advisory committee to the Canadian Wheat Board . 
they say that if you start to exempt some group or an amount of grain from the pooling , the system begins to break down . 
on the other hand , it is important that there be some flexibility . 
as I mentioned earlier , farmers in our area want to build a plant in Crosby , North Dakota so they can access that strong pasta market . 
i suppose that the Wheat Board looks at it and says , " We must have a way to make this work . " 
let me give you an example of what happens in reality . 
we got hailed out on our farm , so we do not have any durum wheat for seed . 
i phoned the Canadian Wheat Board and asked them if I could buy seed from them , out of the elevator at Macoun or Estevan , and what the cost would be . 
we were looking at No. 2 durum with no protein . 
you do not need particularly high protein to get good germination . 
it was selling in the Pioneer elevator in Estevan for $ 4.71 a bushel . 
the Canadian Wheat Board wanted me to buy that back at $ 7.17 a bushel . 
on top of that , I would have to clean it , which costs 30 cents a bushel . 
i would have to clean 15 per cent of it , at least , to get clean seed . 
i might as well go to the certified seed people and give them $ 9 a bushel for seed . 
it works out to the same thing . 
these are the types of problems we are facing . 
that raises the whole subject of a monopoly . 
is the monopoly so powerful that it is preventing farmers from expanding their own operations in a reasonable or sensible way ? 
what we need is a serious debate and to look at this bill in a way that will begin to solve some of these problems . 
this is complicated legislation . 
it is not easy to obtain agreement from farmers on issues such as these . 
many farmers are concerned about the issue of the contingency fund as outlined in Bill C - 4 . 
i do not wish to shock senators , but in the past , if there were losses in sales , the government has made up the difference . 
if there were gains , hopefully farmers received some benefit . 
there is some discrepancy about how great the losses were . 
in the Prairies this winter , we have heard figures of up to $ 20 billion , but the figure of $ 6 billion has been thrown around . 
interest has been paid also on the grain that farmers have sold , which has been an advantage to the farmer . 
there is the question , if we build up a contingency fund of farmer ' s money , what will be the limitations ? 
is the government being let off the hook on this issue ? 
others would say the government has a responsibility to agriculture and to maintaining a strong agricultural base . 
some people say that the role of the Auditor General should be amended in such a way that the Wheat Board operations could be audited yearly . 
the Auditor General has been calling for this change for years and it has not happened . 
this subject is also ignored in the proposed legislation . 
one other area that is of real concern to farmers is the board of directors . 
the bill indicates that there would be 15 people on the board of directors ; ten would be elected farmers and four of them , including the chairperson , would be appointed by the minister . 
there is some concern about this composition . 
the advisory board , in particular , and farm groups are asking for farmers to have the right to elect their own chairperson . 
on the other hand , if the government intends to continue to fund sales and so on , there should be some responsibility to the government . 
i can see both sides of the issue there . 
another concern relates to the powers of the board . 
what are the powers of the board ? 
some powers are laid out in the bill , and other areas relating to the powers of the board are unclear , especially those relating to who hires and fires the people in charge of handling international marketing for the Canadian Wheat Board . 
honourable senators , the steering committee has indicated that we wish to travel to hear from not only farm groups but individual farmers , particularly farmers from the Prairies . 
it has been suggested that the committee visit Winnipeg , Regina , Saskatoon and Edmonton or Red Deer . 
we need to hear from the farmers as to what their concerns are . 
this is an important bill . 
we must have a bill that will address the needs of farmers and the changing situation of the industry . 
i did want to mention the issue of trade . 
about two months ago , President Clinton mentioned the fast track on trade . 
we brought to the committee some of our trade experts in order to better understand what this meant . 
though we are still unclear about the facts , the President of the United States made some very strong statements about agriculture in Canada . 
therefore , it is most important that this bill address the trade situation and its many facets . 
honourable senators , we have a good committee . 
i believe senators from both sides of the house have significant experience in agriculture . 
i hope that this bill can be improved with amendments in order that it may work to the benefit of all agriculture in Canada . 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrrow : 
honourable senators , I have two questions . 
the Honourable Senator Gustafson mentioned the subject of buying and selling durum wheat . 
the wheat was being sold back at a price which , it was assumed , could be met . 
it was not really the 100 - per - cent mark - up that the senator was speaking about ; is that correct ? 
senator Berntson : 
plus elevator costs . 
senator Gustafson : 
that is right , Honourable Senator Sparrow . 
honourable senators would understand that an initial price and an interim price is paid to the farmer . 
senator Sparrow : 
i thank the honourable senator for his assistance . 
i wish to make it clear that the Wheat Board was not charging undue mark - ups on the product . 
the producer would have shared in the $ 7 in the final payment received . 
that is what the honourable senator is telling me . 
i am not trying to pin the senator down to specifics , as neither he nor I have had the opportunity to review or study the bill . 
however , under the subject of auditing , it was mentioned that the Wheat Board was being changed from a Crown corporation to a private corporation . 
perhaps the honourable senator could explain this . 
it is my understanding that as a Crown corporation , the Auditor General would and should have the power to audit the books of the Wheat Board . 
if the Wheat Board becomes a private corporation , the Auditor General would not have the power to audit . 
i understand that someone in the department , the minister or otherwise , stated that if the Wheat Board wants the Auditor General to audit their books , they can ask him . 
senator Gustafson : 
my understanding is that the Auditor General would not have the power to audit unless an amendment was made to the legislation . 
i could be wrong . 
going back to the honourable senator ' s first question , we will not know precisely how much it cost until we get the final payment on durum wheat . 
there is probably a difference of $ 1.25 more a bushel that would be paid to buy seed back . 
senator Sparrow : 
that would be just the administration costs of handling , would it not ? 
therefore , this is not an unreasonable figure ; is that correct ? 
senator Gustafson : 
i made an inquiry into Crosby , North Dakota , and the grain handling charges there . 
the charge at the elevator in Macoun , Saskatchewan , where I live , is 22 cents a bushel . 
that has nothing to do with the transportation . 
in Crosby , North Dakota , it is 7 cents a bushel ; 22 cents compared to 7 cents . 
quite frankly , if anyone wins in this legislation , it will probably be the grain companies , in my opinion . 
senator Sparrow : 
what else is new ? 
senator Gustafson : 
the honourable senator has answered his own question . 
certainly I think the grain companies are the big winners in this bill . 
while I am on my feet , I wish to mention one other thing that is changing the whole grain industry . 
i recently attended the opening of a new plant . 
ConAgra has built an elevator at Corinne , Saskatchewan , that can load 45,000 bushels an hour . 
that is eight cars . 
that allows them to load a unit train of 100 cars in eight hours . 
one of the bins alone , and there are several of them , holds 45,000 bushels . 
the grain industry is changing and changing quickly . 
grain transportation and freight rates will undergo change . 
this , in turn , will put a great deal of pressure on roads and that must be dealt with one way or another . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to take part in the debate on Bill C - 4 . 
coming from Manitoba , I am aware of just how important the Canadian Wheat Board has been and continues to be to Manitoba and across the prairies . 
grain farmers today are concerned about the Wheat Board in a way that they care about very few things beyond the farm gate . 
few things have so much power to affect their livelihoods and , indirectly , the lives of hundreds of thousands of Western Canadians , except perhaps the weather and the railways . 
today , there are some 130,000 families in Western Canada who will be affected by what we do with this bill . 
there are some 2,000 agri - businesses , members of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business in Alberta , Saskatchewan , and Manitoba alone , who are most concerned about this legislation . 
there are more than 100,000 member owners of Prairie Pools Inc. , Western Canada ' s largest grain handling company , that owns elevators and terminals from Thunder Bay to Vancouver . 
everyone wants to see that we get these reforms right , but there is still huge disagreement about what is right . 
as both Senator Gustafson and Senator Taylor reminded us , by conducting $ 6 billion worth of business each year , the Canadian Wheat Board is one of Canada ' s foremost earners of foreign exchange . 
the Wheat Board is important to the Canadian economy and Canadians who live far from the prairie bread basket of the world . 
it is also important to the people of some 70 countries that rely on Canadian wheat and barley . 
we must keep all this in mind as we consider Bill C - 4 . 
to most Western Canadians , the Wheat Board is a long - standing institution . 
the institution was created by Parliament in 1935 and , like any other institution , from time to time it must be reformed , in this case to serve today ' s farmers in today ' s market , not those that existed decades earlier . 
senator Gustafson outlined that for us very clearly . 
in its early years , the Wheat Board was a voluntary pooling agency for wheat . 
when the government closed the open - market trading in 1943 , Canada was at war and facing wartime price controls . 
a few years later , the government extended the Wheat Board ' s authority to barley . 
from that time on , the strength - in - numbers approach to marketing that the Wheat Board epitomizes , has been debated vigorously . 
the debate is not likely to end with this bill . 
wheat Board supporters cite good evidence that this strength - in - numbers approach collectively puts millions of dollars more into farmers ' pockets than they could realize under an open market system . 
one long - term economic study - I think it is Kraft ' s study - estimates annual benefits ranging from $ 265 million to $ 800 million . 
that study I believe had complete access to all of the financial information of the Wheat Board . 
in his book Merchants of Grain , Dan Morgan described the Canadian Wheat Board as the world ' s " most powerful and prestigious marketing board . " 
from the detractors come accusations of high costs , too little accountability to farmers and the general argument , with which obviously I do not agree , that the Wheat Board ' s monopoly runs roughshod over the rights and freedoms of individual farmers . 
i guess unlike private corporations . 
in the 1940 s and the 1950 s , there were thundering attacks on the board from American private grain companies . 
in the 1960 s , some U.S. senators portrayed our wheat sales to the Soviet Union as an example of Canada consorting with the enemy and delivering direct blows to U.S. foreign policy . 
for much of this decade , the attack on the board has come from a minority of the Canadian farmers , who believe that they can do better without it , and from industry interests who want a North American open wheat market . 
two years ago , at a convention of the National Wheat Growers , the U.S. industry announced its support for Canadian farmers who are trying to end the board ' s monopoly on wheat sales . 
they want our marketing system to more closely approximate theirs . 
it is a particularly American thing , they want the same thing in culture . 
certainly , it is in the interests of large American food companies to gain direct access to Canadian wheat in expectation of reducing prices over the long haul . 
Canadian groups , including the National Citizens Coalition , have leapt into the fray , supporting some 100 farmers across Western Canada who have been charged for hauling wheat to the U.S. without export permits . 
just last week in Winnipeg , a Manitoba Court of Queen ' s Bench judge handed down his decision in the case of one of them ; a Saskatchewan farmer who was challenging the board ' s monopoly as unconstitutional . 
the court ruled that the act , which Bill C - 4 would amend , falls within the federal government ' s constitutional powers to regulate trade and commerce . 
the Saskatchewan farmer , Dave Bryan , was fined $ 9,000 and given a two - year suspended sentence . 
Mr. Bryan has said he will appeal , and no doubt the case will make its way to the Supreme Court . 
the point is that the operations of the Canadian Wheat Board are controversial . 
they have always been controversial and they will very likely always be controversial . 
so too are the amendments found in Bill C - 4 . 
i wish to commend Senator Taylor for clearly setting out the main elements of reform that the government is proposing . 
i will not reiterate all of them . 
as he said , the government in proposing to replace government - appointed commissioners with a 15 - member board of directors is trying to give grain producers a greater voice in the operations of the board . 
certainly this is a step towards a more democratic board with greater accountability to farmers . 
whether this is the right formula , whether it goes far enough , whether the means by which it would be executed are the best means , these are legitimate areas of disagreement and I look forward to the committee ' s discussions on these areas . 
the board of directors will have access to all the Wheat Board ' s sales data and financial information , and it will be up to the directors to determine what information is released to permit book holders . 
this may be a step towards greater disclosure of the board ' s activities . 
that remains to be seen , and the point about the Auditor General and the sort of corporation that this is to be is an area that we should discuss very carefully in our committee ' s deliberations . 
however , we should note that the obligation to disclose commercially sensitive information places the Wheat Board at a disadvantage when it negotiates contracts with international buyers . 
one should note as well that there are other government operations , such as the Export Development Corporation - which is also an international trading agency - that are not subject to the Access to Information Act . 
i am not sure what sort of government corporation it is . 
the board would also be given new flexibility tools : the ability to make cash purchases , as Senator Gustafson said , of wheat or barley , to adjust initial payments quickly , and to allow individual producers to cash out of a marketing pool early . 
to insure against losses from these decisions , the bill proposes that a contingency fund be established quite apart from the government ' s guarantees of initial payments , credit sales and general borrowing . 
many are unhappy with that proposal . 
producers know they already pay a steep price for the board ' s decisions and operations ; more than $ 42 million , according to audited figures for the 1995 - 96 crop year . 
the contingency fund remains controversial , as does the government ' s more limited guarantees , and I can understand why . 
it seems very strange that the federal government can provide billions in shaky loans to build a CANDU reactor in China , and nothing at all for a Wheat Board contingency fund . 
perhaps most controversial of all in these proposed reforms are the inclusion and exclusion clauses . 
on the one hand , some predict that the inclusion clause will permit a power grab . 
marketing of canola , oats , flax , and rye could , in theory , come under monopoly control . 
one consequence of that could be a NAFTA Chapter 11 challenge by foreign investors . 
on the other hand , there is fear that the exclusion clause could lead to the slow dismantling of the board . 
the scenarios are both woolly and wild . 
my own feeling on this issue is that I really do not know on which side to come down because we have not heard all the arguments , but I do know the organic growers of farm products are anxious to be included - and perhaps that is the one good thing about this particular proposal . 
i am well aware that these proposed reforms are the result of almost three years of intense consultations and debate . 
the former Minister of Agriculture , Ralph Goodale , began the process in July , 1995 , when he appointed the Western Grain Marketing Panel . 
since then , public hearings have been held , the panel has released its report , and the government introduced Bill C - 72 , which was subjected to more public meetings by the Commons committee and amendment . 
then we saw Bill C - 4 and the hearings on it in the other place . 
many are looking to the Senate to amend this bill , and from entirely contradictory positions . 
the collective experience and wisdom in this chamber , particularly among my colleague on the Agriculture Committee , should be applied to Bill C - 4 . 
we need to hear the arguments to ensure that there will be no unforeseen consequences of this bill , and to heed recommendations for its improvement . 
we need to do a thorough safety check before this bill is allowed on the road . 
frankly , given the immense importance of this legislation to the people of the Prairies , to the Canadian economy , and to those around the world who rely on our grains , we would be negligent if we did anything less . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , debate adjourned . 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool , for the second reading of Bill C - 17 , to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , the United Nations has declared on more than one occasion that Canada is the best country in the world in which to live . 
i will be proud when the declaration is that Canada is the best country in the world in which to do business . 
major hurdles to such a designation are excessive taxation and an overbearing regulatory burden that stifles competition and muffles the attainment of all the benefits flowing from an open and free market - place . 
our ability to accumulate wealth is also seriously hampered by regulations restricting foreign investment , which only serves to raise the cost of capital . 
the same is true for telecommunications . 
canada has built one of the finest telecommunications networks in the world . 
we want to be the first in developing a digital economy , and we want to be a world leader in knowledge - based undertakings , but this industry is hamstrung by regulation . 
the doctrine of forbearance - that is , forbearance from regulation - and opening the market - place to real competition should be the intrinsic design of all telecommunications legislation . 
i submit that there is no evil to be slain , and if there were , there are ample safeguards in the Competition Act or in the CRTC ' s current regulatory tool kit , such as decisions , tariffs and orders . 
bill C - 17 represents the Government of Canada ' s response to the Agreement on Basic Telecommunications , which was set up under the rubric of the General Agreement on Trade in Services , GATS , and was ratified by 69 countries of the World Trade Organization , WTO , in April of this year . 
for all intents and purposes , this agreement covers more than 90 per cent of the world ' s telecommunications market , estimated at $ 880 billion in 1996 . 
while Bill C - 17 involves primarily powers conferred on the CRTC , it also embodies measures relating to the Government of Canada ' s decision to open local telephone markets to competition . 
as a result , today more than 6 million Canadians subscribe to wireless telephone services . 
consumers also enjoy the choice between dozens of long distance companies , such as Sprint Canada , AT & T Canada , f ONOROLA , ACC and others , that have successfully carved out a market share approximating 40 per cent of the national long - distance market that was once entirely controlled by the Stentor companies . 
moreover , competition in the long distance market has appeared much faster , and over a relatively broader clientele base , in Canada than in almost any other country in the world . 
in fact , this market share capture by competitors was achieved in just five years , twice as fast as it occurred in the United States . 
all of these developments have , in part , become possible because of the revamping of the Railway Act and the introduction of the Telecommunications Act of 1993 , which your committee on transport and communications studied , deliberated on and significantly modified at the Senate pre - study stage of that bill . 
as chairman of the Senate committee at that time , I can assure you that all those drafting and influencing the contents of that act deliberately excluded the principle of licensing of international service providers and resellers . 
bill C - 17 contains 23 clauses consisting of five sections dealing with : one , a licensing regime for international service providers ; two , liberalizing foreign ownership restrictions on submarine cable and satellite companies ; three , telephone numbering administration by a third party ; four , certification of telecommunications equipment ; five , the removal of ownership restrictions on Teleglobe Canada Inc. to conform to all other telecommunications service providers operating in Canada . 
honourable senators , it is clauses 1 , 3 and 7 that are troubling . 
these clauses would give the CRTC the authority to introduce a new licensing regime for international telecommunications service providers , including both vertically integrated infrastructure owners and resellers of these services . 
while the bill was significantly amended by the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry to include only international service providers - initially the bill would have captured domestic service providers as well - the authority conferred to the CRTC remains too broad and too vague . 
industry Canada and the CRTC maintain that regulation by licensing is required to make sure that there is a level playing field among would - be international players . 
they argue that predatory pricing on the part of Canadian subsidiaries of foreign monopolies and the possibility of Canada - to - Canada bypass by way of the United States would pose problems . 
let us deal with the second assertion first . 
bypassing the Canadian infrastructure only makes sense in the first case ; it would be ludicrous to fear any possibility of Canada - to - Canada bypass in the second and third cases . 
yet , Industry Canada and the CRTC know that the Stentor facilities are approximately 10 per cent more cost efficient than alternative American infrastructure . 
so Canada - to - Canada bypass is highly unlikely today , and would only be , at best , a remote possibility in the future - far too little an occurrence to worry about , and far too costly for government to monitor and enforce routing restrictions . 
of course , the best way for the government to eliminate the incentives for engaging in Canada - to - Canada bypass practices would be to enact legislation consistent with the provision of efficient telecommunications services , which means the adoption of the forbearance doctrine as established in the Telecommunications Act . 
indeed , the contemplated licensing regime may , in fact , inhibit efficient international telecommunications as the uncertainty it imposes on potential investors may prove to be a significant barrier to entry . 
as a result , Bill C - 17 makes Canada - to - Canada bypass far more likely , for it potentially neutralizes the disciplining effects of full and open competition . 
as for predatory pricing problems that might arise in the future , it is also a remote possibility - a possibility that is becoming more remote all the time with the liberalization of international and domestic telecom markets across the world and the signing of the GATS . 
put another way , there will simply be fewer and fewer foreign monopolies around to engage in predatory behaviour in the future , given the implementation of the GATS . 
indeed , the CRTC had to deal with one such case recently . 
Hong Kong Tel allegedly priced its services below Teleglobe prices in the B.C. market , targeting its ex - patriot clientele now living in the greater Vancouver area . 
in the end , the CRTC ordered BC Tel , the company leasing the Teleglobe line , to cut off Hong Kong Tel . 
the point is that the CRTC already has the ability to stop predatory pricing . 
the Government of Canada has other tools at its disposal for stopping this predatory practice . 
predatory pricing is a criminal offence under the Competition Act . 
other predatory activities are governed under the " Abuse of Dominance " provisions in the same act . 
these mechanisms have shown themselves to be adequate to govern the conduct of companies in unregulated markets . 
they are also all that is needed for Canada ' s international telecommunications market . 
the Department of Industry and the CRTC point to other nations , like the United States and the European Community , that are implementing a licensing regime - if they have it , we should have it . 
but these countries do not have the existing regulatory framework to take care of these problems like Canada does , nor do they have telecommunications facilities that are as efficient as those in Canada . 
their much larger market and relatively inefficient facilities make them ideal targets for predatory or bypass possibilities . 
furthermore , as Mr. Courtois of Bell Canada pointed out in his testimony at the House of Commons hearings : 
... in the U . K . , the licensing approach has created much delay and resulted in action because the licence conditions don ' t permit much flexibility . 
and in New Zealand ' s case , the licensing regime caused basic interconnection disputes to be considered in the courts - all the way up to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council - for 10 years , only to result in the parties being sent back to the negotiating table . 
others , such as Call - Net Enterprises and AT & T Canada , argue that indirect regulation by way of the facility owners is inefficient , and that direct control over the alleged predator through licensing is preferable . 
direct regulation offers the CRTC the possibility of intermediate types of solutions to these problems rather than being forced to adopt all - or - nothing propositions like cutting off Hong Kong Tel . 
however , what is seldom told and often meant by these intermediate solutions is tariff regulation . 
in such a circumstance , the CRTC would have the power to set higher prices or tariff rates of any alleged offending party through the licence it holds . 
this power , I repeat , is contrary to the doctrine of forbearance - forbearance from regulation . 
it was contrary to the will of Parliament when , on the advice of both Houses of Parliament , it adopted Canada ' s Telecommunications Act . 
indeed , I will quote from Mr. Nick Mulder of Stentor before the House of Commons committee reviewing Bill C - 17 . 
he said : 
indeed , the original draft of the Telecommunications Act , as tabled in the House of Commons , envisaged a licensing regime . 
wisely , in our view , these provisions were removed from the bill ... the 
concept of licensing for international services has , since the successful WTO negotiations in Geneva , been considered desirable , though not in law essential , to bring the form of the Canadian regulatory regime into harmony with the majority of our major trading partners . 
the U.S. , for example , licenses carriers for international services , though not for domestic services . 
however , it is , in our view , not essential to provide to the Telecommunications Act a complete overlay of licensing . 
as the Canadian Bar Association also reminded the House of Commons committee studying the same bill : 
we cannot , therefore , expect open competition to rule in the international telecommunications markets , but managed competition . 
open competition promises efficient telecommunications services , better and more variety of services , commensurate prices and innovative technologies , products and services . 
managed competition assures us of none of this . 
as John Milton wrote in Tenure of Kings and Magistrates in 1649 : 
none can love freedom heartily , but good men ; the rest love not freedom , but license . 
what is the public policy justification for licensing international telecommunications providers ? 
one can only come to the conclusion that there is none . 
international service providers are guaranteed " national treatment " and " most favoured nation , " MFN , status under the GATS . 
that is enough for the market - place to naturally produce a so - called " level playing field . " 
the Canadian Bar Association further submits : 
while we recognize that a number of the provisions are required to give effect to Canada ' s specific commitments as part of the World Trade Organization ' s General Agreement on Trade in Services , we are concerned that a number of the provisions in the bill go beyond what is required . 
the level gridiron that I propose is not new . 
in fact , you observe its operation every day . 
it can be found in virtually all unregulated markets in the Canadian economy . 
this " level playing field " is premised on the concept of efficient provision of goods and services . 
firm survival is , then , only assured when business plans are congruent with efficiency . 
those firms that stray too far from this principle court corporate reorganization , bankruptcy and failure . 
clearly , the margin of error is much tighter under an open competitive regime than that of managed competition through a licensing regime . 
it is interesting to note that at the hearings held in the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry , the sole telephone company proposing de novo entry into international telecommunications , GeoReach Telecommunications Inc. , advocated absolutely no need for a licensing regime . 
clearly , GeoReach has the most to lose from predatory pricing and yet it realizes and has criticized Bill C - 17 as excessive and wasteful regulation , as follows : 
GeoReach has not seen any evidence to suggest that the Commission ' s regulatory powers as they now exist are not sufficient for that purpose . 
for example , a number of Commission rulings that ... impose various consumer and competitive safeguards on the incumbent service providers rely upon the enforcement provision currently enshrined in the Telecom Act . 
at the same time , the competitive marketplace continues to grow . 
in other words , the innovation , price reductions and consumer choice brought about by the introduction and subsequent evolution of competition under regulatory frameworks established by the Commission in various market segments to date is ample evidence of the sufficiency of the Commission ' s existing regulatory powers . 
the incumbent telephone companies , on the other hand , seem to prefer the licensing option in the transition period from monopoly to competition , proposing a March 1 , 2000 sunset clause . 
but this is better viewed as a compromise position . 
in any event , they , too , realize that licensing regimes tend to outlive their useful lives . 
bill C - 17 raises other concerns as well . 
the bill pertains to basic telecommunications and provides a definition of a " telecommunications service provider , " which includes services provided by exempt transmission apparatus . 
one would be quite correct to interpret the term " apparatus " to mean computers . 
recognizing that the Telecommunications Act currently excludes computers from this definition , I must concur with the Canadian Association of Internet Providers , which maintains that there is the imminent danger of enormous regulatory expansion subtly hidden in Bill C - 17 . 
the Internet and many computer - based communications networks must remain unregulated , for only the forbearance doctrine promises continuing communications innovation and improvements in Canada ' s equivalent to elsewhere in the world . 
a licensing regime can only mean retarded growth in computer network services in Canada relative to the rest of the world . 
this must not be allowed to happen . 
in conclusion , Bill C - 17 represents a huge detour along the liberalization path set out by Parliament when it adopted Canada ' s Telecommunications Act in response to the development and proliferation of digital transmissions technologies . 
honourable senators , our duty is clear . 
we must sever clauses 1 , 3 and 7 from Bill C - 17 so that the remainder of the bill can proceed quickly to Royal Assent . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Poulin , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
aboriginal Governance 
consideration of Report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples ( budget - study on Aboriginal governance ) , presented in the Senate on February 18 , 1998 . 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
honourable senators , I move adoption of this report . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , could the honourable senator provide us with a brief outline of the objective for the study ? 
senator Watt : 
honourable senators , I will try to be helpful as to the magnitude of this study . 
when I say " aboriginal people , " I refer to status Indians who live on reserves . 
the minister has a responsibility to those people and for their lands . 
when you take into account the other aboriginal peoples , namely , the M é tis and the Inuit , they do not fall categorically under section 91.24 of the British North American Act . 
in 1982 , during the period of the patriation of the Constitution , when Pierre Elliott Trudeau was still prime minister of this country , he provided some accommodation for aboriginal peoples - the Indians , the Inuit and the M é tis . 
that accommodation was section 35 of the Constitution Act , 1982 . 
since then , there have not been many political processes in this respect , other than the Charlottetown accord and the Meech Lake accord when Brian Mulroney was the prime minister of this country . 
the aboriginal people still feel that there is a chance to build an aboriginal society by putting together a government of their own . 
under section 91.24 of the British North America Act , the Minister of Indian Affairs is entrusted with responsibility for aboriginal peoples . 
he can only deal with the concept of governance as an ethnic government . 
the public understands that that is a racist government because it will govern people who live inside the reserves . 
in my personal experience at trying to arrive at a workable instrument , I have been involved in direct negotiations over the last 20 years with the Quebec government and the Government of Canada . 
aboriginal governance attempts to take into account the elements that are not normally taken into account in public government - that is , the ethnic component . 
let me clarify that ethnic component . 
we must explore the ethnic component in order to accommodate the aboriginal people to see whether they really need to have a third level of order . 
senators are quite familiar with that topic . 
it has been discussed . 
perhaps there is another way to come up with an instrument that would accommodate the needs of the aboriginal people , taking into account the ethnic component , subject by subject . 
i would like this committee to focus on that issue . 
we owe it to the aboriginal people , as well as the citizens of Canada . 
once and for all , they have to know exactly what type of instrument is to be enacted by the government in due course . 
we do not know that yet . 
in that area , I am trying to provide some way of laying out the objectives of this committee . 
the magnitude of the area on which we need to focus is great . 
for example , if there are to be relationships between aboriginal governments and municipalities coexisting within the same community , how will they function ? 
various sets of options need to be examined . 
the other relationship to be expected is that of the regional government . 
as well , we must examine provincial jurisdiction under section 92 . 
we are talking about a parliament within a Parliament . 
my interpretation of the royal commission report is that there is much work to be done . 
this is the magnitude of the committee ' s responsibility , if it is approved by the committee . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , if this budget is approved by the Senate today , does it cover work up until the end of this fiscal year , or is it envisaged to cover work after this fiscal year and into the next fiscal year ? 
what period is the money for , and when will it be paid ? 
senator Watt : 
the amount of the budget approved by the Internal Economy Committee is very limited . 
it covers the period of time up to the beginning of April or the end of March . 
if you are asking me about the overall budget for the duration of the study - let us say , over 18 months - that would be in the neighbourhood of $ 1 million . 
if you break it down into one year , you are talking about an amount slightly higher than $ 600,000 dollars . 
i looked at the amount of money spent by other committees . 
the committee that comes closest to this budget is the Transport Committee at around $ 400,000 . 
i know this amount is high . 
however , if we are serious about having input from the aboriginal network at the grass - roots level , we need resource people who will link the committee to the aboriginal organizations . 
for that reason , there is a need for three aboriginals to be hired - one Inuit , one M é tis and one Indian . 
we also need a coordinator and an administrative assistant to the coordinator , because the work must be coordinated . 
that may be unusual in the Senate . 
you may think that perhaps those individuals should be supplied by the Department of Indian Affairs . 
i thought of that at the beginning of the discussion around this issue , but since the Senate has not spent very much money on aboriginals , I thought this was an opportunity to put forward these suggestions . 
over the last seven years , the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples has spent about $ 42,000 . 
senator Kinsella : 
can the honourable senator help us understand the proposal presently before us ? 
senator Watt : 
honourable senators , no one has been hired yet . 
i cannot hire people unless I have full approval from the committee . 
senator Kinsella : 
given that we are five weeks from the end of the fiscal year , if this budget is approved today , is the $ 7,000 envisaged to be paid to the coordinator of special study from tomorrow until March 31 ? 
senator Watt : 
honourable senators , I am not sure if I understood the question . 
senator Kinsella : 
we are being asked to approve $ 7,000 , to be payable to a co - ordinator of special study at the rate of $ 350 times 20 days . 
my question is , given that we have only about 20 working days left , will that amount be used ? 
senator Watt : 
we would have used it if we had moved rapidly in terms of getting some decisions made at the steering committee . 
your answer would be that we might be short . 
if this money is not spent , it is not spent . 
we are also exhausting time right now , because the entire matter is still up for scrutiny by the committee . 
honourable senators , I am new at dealing with something like this , but , over the years , I have noticed something which I find unusual . 
a motion is placed , an order of reference is put through , and then comes the budget . 
i have thought that was usual ever since I came to the Senate , and it was one of the first points I raised when I came here . 
i asked how we could approve a motion without knowing what it would cost . 
i think the rules in that area need to be changed . 
i did not think that I would become the victim of that while following Senate procedure . 
senator Kinsella : 
if the Senate approves this budget to complete this discrete study , is it your understanding and the understanding of your committee that in no way is the Senate committing itself to this longer study of over $ 1 million to which we alluded a few minutes ago ? 
is that clear in the honourable senator ' s mind ? 
we are not buying into anything other than what is here . 
senator Watt : 
honourable senators , I fully understand that . 
i might as well take this matter somewhere else . 
i may have to raise some money somewhere else if the Senate is not willing to pay for it . 
this is important . 
the Royal Commission report is far from implementation without a lot more work being put into it . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , in light of what Senator Watt has told us , it seems to me that this is part of a longer study . 
if this committee is meeting tomorrow to revisit the larger question , perhaps the wisest thing for us to do is to stand this matter over until that meeting takes place . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Ghitter calling the attention of the Senate to the concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution : ( a ) its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; ( b ) alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; ( c ) the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire to see equal numbers of Senators representing each province ; ( d ) the length of term of office ; ( e ) the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level ; and ( f ) the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . - ( 
honourable Senator Gigant è s ) . 
hon. Richard J . Doyle : 
honourable senators , on February 10 , Senator Ron Ghitter announced his intention to pursue the oldest riddle in the Senate - whither the Senate itself ? 
long before the enactment of the instruments of Confederation , Sir John A . Macdonald and his merry men were debating the future of " second thoughting . " 
what a collection of molehills has emerged from formal studies of the place . 
still , the halls have rung with the genuine concerns of many dedicated senators , from George Brown on one side arguing for Senate power , down to Grattan O ' Leary on the other side with a ringing speech against suspensive vetoes and intrusions in provincial affairs . 
he saw no value in Croll - like investigations . 
" i think , " he said , " it was Mr. Disraeli who said that royal commissions discovered what everybody already knew . " 
why should the Senate waste time ? 
rarely have we been reminded that if the Senate had not done some things right , it would not have survived for more than 130 years . 
in my brief and haphazard experience of this place , I have come to believe that the Senate - God bless it - is , through good and bad experiences , reforming itself . 
if we do come to formal renovation of the upper chamber , the task will be made easier by the achievements and mistakes we have made in the last dozen or so years when we have been profiting from Lester Pearson ' s redefining of the age limits . 
i shall now address the few important pluses and minuses in the manner in which the Senate has discharged its duties . 
first , a milestone , I am certain , and a mistake , I fear , was the Liberal Party ' s decision to abolish Senate pre - study of legislation while the legislation is still in the Commons . 
legislative changes once made painlessly , informally and quickly , are now seen as rude amendments , challenges to a minister ' s wisdom and invasions of the turf of elected parliamentarians . 
to this day , the Senate limps where it could run in the improvement of bills that become laws . 
second , further attention must be given to Senate re - examination of the hostile demonstrations staged to publicize the fight against the Goods and Services Tax . 
i wrote the following for the January 1991 issue of The Idler Magazine : 
the cost of Allan J . MacEachen ' s decision to risk the future of the Canadian Senate in an outrageous bid to restore the Liberals as the nation ' s natural governing party is still to be measured . 
today , historians writing from our universities and Op - Ed pages make the usual mentions of kazoos , whistle - blowing and filibusters to cover and obscure the ugliness of shouts of " despicable bastard , " mock attacks on the Speaker , and fist - shaking threats described in contemporary accounts of the procedural battles and round - the - clock sittings that left the Senate in chaos from October 9 to December 14 , 1990 . 
those who listened heard the last gasp of the old clubbers of the Canadian Senate . 
those who watched the media had the embarrassment of listening to the Deputy Leader in the Senate name and praise eight lovely members of the Parliamentary Press Gallery for " reporting this history - in - the - making in a very conscientious way . " 
a package of rules that would prevent any repetition of the GST affair was completed in the shadow of a revolt by Senators Brenda Robertson , Normand Grimard and a committee of Tories - and witnessed by a single , silent Liberal who represented his boycotting colleagues . 
significantly , no move to withdraw these new rules has been made in the six years following . 
bill C - 22 , in its present form , is unacceptable , since it removes from those directly affected by it a fundamental right available to all Canadians , namely , an appeal to the rule of law . 
anyone in Canada charged with an offence , whether criminal or civil , whether serial killer or embezzler , whether as a child molester or a traffic violator , is given his day in court . 
not even the most avid supporter of C - 22 has referred either directly or indirectly to any illegality having been committed during the four years it took to put the Pearson agreements together . 
yet , in this most unusual of bills , the government denies access to the courts , and with a few words not only cancels the agreements , but denies that they ever existed ! 
one cannot repeat often enough that we do not seek compensation for anyone . 
we have no interest in claims whatever their nature . 
we do not even presume that the courts will rule in favour of the claimants . 
to be blunt , we are indifferent to the conclusion of any court action . 
in March 1997 , nearly three years after the fight began , The Globe and Mail editorialized : 
the bill was not only an affront to the Constitution ( as the Canadian Bar Association testified ) it was an affront to natural justice , fairness and public intelligence . 
Undeterred , the editor of The Globe and Mail continues his campaign against power in the hands of the unelected . 
he has only recently switched to urging , and I quote : 
... total abolition without prejudice to the Senate ' s re - invention . 
he writes approvingly , and again I quote : 
we now have a powerful new check on the power of the Commons in the form of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
he does not acknowledge that , with the Court , there remains the problem of their appointment . 
in other encyclicals , the editor would empower the 150 Companions of the Order of Canada - all appointed - to be the arbiters of high appointment , to be the people who choose the next Governor General , who would succeed the Queen . 
the Senate soldiers on - serving the demand for public windows on national affairs , as it did on Newfoundland ' s Term 17 , as a recognition of neglected minority and regional rights . In 
another sensible move , persuading the Minister of Finance to do his duty and appear before the Committee of the Whole to argue about changes to the financial structure of his proposed pension plan . 
thus , through recognition of errors and finding of alternatives , the Senate demonstrates its capacity to renew . 
it still has reforms to tackle . 
make certain that all Senate committees , including the committee that governs internal economy and Senate operations , encourage the presence of the media in all but the very few exceptions set forth in the rule book . 
senator Ghitter ' s happy prospect is that the upper chamber will continue to change itself as his inquiry goes on . 
one thing is certain , it will soon have the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs and its study of Bill C - 220 . 
the examination is in its final stages and has presented a clear demonstration of the Commons ' need for sober , second thought . 
remember , Bill C - 220 is the bill intended to strip murderers of the profits they might make from their crimes ; the Wappel bill , which it turns out is unconstitutional , a certain barrier for the Marshalls , the Milgaards and the Morins who seek to prove their innocence , and it will be the Senate ' s role to remind the public that the Wappel bill was passed in a unanimous vote , and not once but twice . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Senator Doyle , if I may . 
honourable senators , much of what Senator Doyle has said was a matter of opinion so I will not engage him on that . 
the first point he raised dealt with pre - study . 
if I heard him correctly , he said that the practice which is now followed , which is that we deal with bills after they have come here following third reading in the House of Commons , has the effect of posing a challenge to ministers when the bills in question are ministers ' bills . 
the implication is that there has been a decrease in the number of amendments , that somehow or other we are cautious about offending the ministers , and consequently , do not amend their bills . 
has he made a study of the number of amendments that have been proposed to bills coming to this place from the other place , as his speech seemed to apply ? 
senator Doyle : 
i have not made a neat study of the number of amendments because I have never found it useful to count the number of changes . 
one large change can change the entire thrust of a bill . 
another amendment might not make even a difference of 50 cents by the time it is translated to public spending . 
i know this much , sir , that since the day that Senator MacEachen made his speech , I have not been on a committee which has pre - studied a single item . 
senator Stewart : 
i realize that the importance of amendment is not necessarily captured in the number of amendments , but I must say to Senator Doyle that participating in the work of the Standing Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , and Senator Oliver has been there , I have been very much impressed by the number of amendments that committee has offered to government bills and the readiness of ministers to see the point of those amendments . 
perhaps some ministers are offended , and perhaps some members of the House of Commons are offended , but there seem to be others who are quite willing to accept well - reasoned proposals for amendments to their legislation . 
does Senator Doyle not think that the old practice of carrying amendments down the back corridor to the ministers , where senators sometimes would say - and one senator , I guess , was famous for this - " Unless you make this amendment in your bill , I can assure you , sir , that it will not go forward in our house , " - is really a form of concealed legislation ? 
in this day , when we want transparency , should we not be proposing amendments to bills openly and on the record , in the course of due process , rather than doing it in that earlier , behind - the - scenes method ? 
senator Doyle : 
honourable senators , I know there was some of the clandestine approach from time to time , but I can also remember a time when a minister , I believe it was Mr. Hockin , was speaking on a financial bill , and swiftly acknowledged at the outset , as they were sending it back to the Senate , that the amendments they had just made had been proposed in the Senate and had been well done . 
i practically fell off my stool . 
it was not a " high noon " situation every time you tried to bring good sense to matter of changing bills . 
senator Stewart : 
but surely you do not mean to imply that it is " high noon " now every time we propose an amendment ? 
senator Doyle : 
i often find a great deal of hostility to changing anything in a bill that comes this way . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I have two questions for Senator Doyle : 
you said - and I fully agree - that the Senate should represent all the views that are debated throughout all the parts of Canada . 
do you think , first , that the senators who have decided , for all kinds of reasons , to sit as independents have a role to play in the Senate ? 
in my case , as you know , we cannot find a way , after five years , to put me on a committee , even after having chaired , as The Globe and Mail once said , the most difficult committees in the House of Commons for 15 or 20 years . 
here I arrive , and we cannot seem to find a way to change the rules , and the rules are so simple . 
is there a role for the independents ? 
second , would you agree with a view of mine - and if not , I would like to debate it with you , because you are a man of reflection - that since the Prime Minister of Canada has always promoted women in the House of Commons , even though it is difficult to impose the choice candidates across the land , and since he has the option - a very famous phrase - should he not consider announcing that his project for the year 2000 and beyond would be to reach a goal of having 50 / 50 representation of men and women in the Senate ? 
it is reachable . 
all it takes is a decision of the Prime Minister to recommend and to choose these senators from the fields wherein we have a necessity . 
i always said to every Prime Minister that they should try to choose , ahead of time , senators who have an expertise in certain domains where we have some colleagues who will soon be retiring . 
is it not time to reach 50 / 50 ? 
senator Doyle : 
honourable senators , on the 50 / 50 aspect , I think that would probably be opposed by the women in the Senate , who I understand at the moment are working on 65 / 35 - 35 for the men . 
on the status of the independent members , I have always thought the independent members were the most influential in the chamber . 
they were sought out , they were given trips , they were offered favours , if they would only vote with this side or that side on the next bill . 
senator Stewart : 
that was in former days . 
senator Doyle : 
why you would give that up to be just a plain old senator , especially a male senator , I do not know . 
seriously , I think it is always wrong to set specific numbers or percentages . 
however , I was not jesting when I was talking about the pleasures of independent status . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
there were independent senators before , and some even chaired committees . 
there was Senator Pitfield , who was a very able chairman . 
it is easy . 
you only need to add one member to a committee , as long as the government keeps its majority , and in the case of a tie the chairman votes . 
it adds only one more . 
there have been all these years of waiting . 
i was told , " If you vote with us , you can be on the committee . " 
if I did that , though , I would no longer be an independent . 
however , the fact remains that the government has the right to expect a majority . 
it would be very easy . 
where the rule now says 12 , it could say 13 . If you happen , once in a blue moon , to vote against the government , it would be 6 to 6 , and the chairman draws the line , and all he needs to do is vote as the seventh member . 
if we cannot find a solution for that impasse , how can we start talking about reform of the Senate ? 
i think this problem could be solved . 
everybody comes to me and says , " Yes , but it is the fault of the others , " and the others say " It is the fault of the others . " 
i do not want to have a clash with colleagues . 
senator Doyle : 
i simply wish to remind Senator Prud ' homme that I did say during my speech that I do believe it is time to go back at the rules , and to weigh them carefully . 
however , I am sure that there will still be some that will seem unfair . 
as far as independent senators are concerned , we have several in our caucus whom we might recommend to you . 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , I have a question for Senator Doyle . 
he is correct that in the Salter Hayden era a great number of pre - studies were done . 
i am not in favour of pre - studies , except in very special circumstances . 
when pre - studies were done , bills were passed within two or three days of coming to the Senate with the argument that they had been studied . 
we were always accused of " rubber - stamping " because the public did not realize that a pre - study had been done . 
as Senator Stewart said , deals were made . 
the Senate as a whole really did not know the provisions of those bills , because the bills did not come before the entire Senate . 
when the Senate votes on a bill , it is important that all senators are as aware as possible of the provisions of it . 
of course , pre - study prohibited that in many instances . 
the Senate committee learned nothing more than did the House of Commons committee studying the bill because the same day as witnesses appeared there , they appeared here . 
neither committee learned the full story on an issue . 
one other danger in pre - studies is powerful chairmen who can negotiate and make deals with various industries . 
with that as background , does the honourable senator think there is some danger in having pre - studies , of being tarred with rubber - stamping , even more than we are presently ? 
senator Doyle : 
if the Senate believes that there is a danger of that recurring , surely , when it formalizes its intent to return to that process it will institute safeguards . 
perhaps we would have to reshape parts of it ; nothing is ever exactly the same as it was . 
however , surely we should not encourage ministers to come before us saying that they have presented a perfect bill . 
i have heard ministers say that in more than one instance , and in a way that I would say intimidated the chairman of the committee . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
Iraq 
canada ' s Policy in Current Crisis - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable Senators , I would like to speak in this debate on the inquiry of Senator Grafstein calling the attention of the Senate to Canada ' s policy respecting the Iraq crisis . 
honourable senators , the countdown has stopped . 
today , the Secretary - General of the United Nations announced that an agreement was reached this weekend in the Security Council . 
we must thank him for his efforts . 
in his speech last week , Senator Grafstein raised some significant and pertinent questions . 
it is true that the government of Canada ' s policy , as he said : 
... seems more opaque than transparent . 
moreover , the speech by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in a special debate in the House of Commons struck me as far more an attack against the other MPs than a statement justifying Canada ' s position to all Canadians . 
this is unfortunate . 
under such circumstances , how can doubt not be cast on Canada ' s position ? 
has Prime Minister Chr é tien made every effort on the diplomatic level , or did he just immediately answer yes when his friend , the President of the United States , called upon him ? 
why did Prime Minister Chr é tien not follow the example of the French President and actively support the efforts of Secretary General Kofi Annan ? 
why did he not play a leadership role , rather than let himself be pulled along by the Americans ? 
honourable senators , as you know , the state of the Canadian Armed Forces and their readiness in the Iraqi crisis were the subject of many questions by my colleagues on this side of the Senate . 
the government ' s responses contradict the information provided by the vaccine manufacturer . 
why deny the evidence ? 
why hide the facts ? 
i realize the situation with Iraq is not simple , indeed not . 
there are always two sides to the coin . 
a war with Iraq , certainly , but what will be the effect on the Middle East ? 
what will be the effect on the Arab - Israeli peace process ? 
we know that Islamic extremists have gained strength . 
they are operating on several fronts at once : the suffering of the Iraqi people , the frustrations of the Palestinians and the continuing presence of the Americans in the Gulf . 
one wrong move and the entire situation could go out of control . 
according to the Minister of Foreign Affairs , who has taken to echoing the Americans , the United States may attack Iraq because Baghdad has not complied with the Resolution 687 conditions for a ceasefire . 
but many experts disagree . 
one of them is Professor Weller of Cambridge University . 
in his view , attacking Iraq is justified only in the context of self - defence . 
since Iraq has not initiated an armed attack or made any direct threat to attack , this weakens the argument for an attack based on the principle of self - defence without a mandate from the United Nations Security Council . 
in addition , a seven - year - old resolution cannot be used to authorize military action , because Iraq has complied with several parts of this resolution . 
the professor reminds us that individual states , contrary to the Council , cannot simply declare that they have the right to use force in response to violations . 
should there not be another vote of the Security Council before Iraq is bombarded ? 
honourable senators , this impression of rushing into military action leaves me not knowing what to think . 
states that declare war against other states do not do so lightly . 
military strategists set objectives , work out scenarios , and assess risks . 
does anyone in this chamber know the Canadian response to these questions , and for that matter , does anyone know the American responses ? 
the author Tom Clancy raised excellent points in an article in The New York Times reprinted in Le Monde . 
he said that it was sad to see how little interest there was in the methods and probable consequences of an attack against Iraq . 
a one - ton bomb would destroy everything for hundreds of metres and would not distinguish between men and women , children and the elderly . 
it will therefore understandably be essential to know what the target is and whether it is sufficiently important to justify the risk of killing or wounding everyone unfortunate enough to be in its path . 
so what is the mission ? 
if it is to suppress the weapons of mass destruction and the facilities where they are manufactured , then we need to know the locations . 
but do we ? 
a strictly air - borne war , no matter how much of a surgical strike it claims to be , has no chance whatsoever to destroy the stocks that are spread over a number of secret sites . 
who located the target of the strike ? 
who prepared us and the rest of the world for the unpleasant retaliations of an offensive , even a successful one ? 
what is the probability of failure and what would its consequences be ? 
when are we to declare a victory ? 
have these questions been answered in sufficient detail to safeguard human lives ? 
bombing Iraq will not put an end to the problems of armament , particularly when intelligence seems to indicate that part of the arsenal is already in other countries like the Sudan and Libya , for example . 
Saddam Hussein seems determined to use his own people as bomb shields , which makes the death of innocent civilians inevitable even in a legitimate attack . 
who has given agreement for women and children to be killed ? 
another point to which I want to draw your attention , honourable senators , is the condition of the Iraqi people . 
the United Nations imposed economic sanctions on Iraq in August 1991 . 
in April 1995 , United Nations resolution 986 allowed oil to be sold for food , but with restrictions . 
that resolution was implemented in May 1997 . 
according to press reports , Kofi Annan will be asking the U . N . to allow an increase in Iraqi oil sales . 
that is not surprising . 
reports by a number of bodies linked to the United Nations have drawn a picture of the situation . 
even the Secretary - General has reported to the Security Council on the situation on February 1 . 
here is what is known of the situation from a humanitarian point of view . 
clearly , the economic sanctions are working very well . 
the situation is alarming as far as the children are concerned . 
infant mortality is up from 25 in 1000 births prior to the war , to 92 in 1000 births in 1994 . 
on November 26 , 1997 , UNICEF declared that close to one million Iraqi children were suffering from malnutrition . 
the Secretary - General is asking that 1,500 community centres be created to provide care for children . 
he is also asking that extra food be supplied to a minimum target population of close to two million people , including children under the age of five suffering from chronic malnutrition , pregnant women , nursing mothers , people who have been displaced within the country , repatriated citizens and hospitalized patients . 
i will not go on , but the deterioration in the water supply and treatment system has resulted in a situation that is terrifying . 
it is true , honourable senators , that the suffering of the Iraqi people is the result not just of economic sanctions , but of Saddam Hussein ' s policies as well . 
once again , victims have been taken hostage . 
honourable senators , I am particularly concerned by the possibility that bombing the sites of the chemical and bacterial weapons contravenes the Geneva Convention . 
if we knew where the arms are stored and bombed these locations and chemical and bacterial agents were then released into the atmosphere killing people , would we not be guilty of breach of the Geneva Convention ? 
this would apply particularly to the generals and colonels who enter the victims under the heading " collateral damage . " 
i am not one of them . 
this is a serious matter that warrants serious consideration by the government . 
he is wrong on several counts . 
it is not such a great idea to test chemical weapons on your own people . 
it is not such a great idea to let them die . 
it is neither an offence to national dignity , nor humiliating to submit to UN inspections . 
all of the countries in the world that support disarmament agree to inspections and controls . 
the Americans have admitted that the UN control missions eliminated far more of the Iraqi military potential than did the 1991 war . 
i doubt that the Government of Canada will respond to my questions any more than it will respond to the questions of our colleague , Senator Grafstein . 
if the war appears unnecessary , it is also due to the fact that its aims are vague and the means to achieving them inappropriate . 
in the case of doubt , it is better to leave well enough alone . 
this is not reason enough to forget that the non - proliferation of bacterial and other weapons of mass destruction , the poor man ' s atomic bombs , will remain a decisive issue in years to come . 
the end of the cold war has given humanity the possibility of a future free from the threat of an ultimate apocalypse . 
this cannot be left in the hands of a few crazed megalomaniacs . 
the rather ridiculous quibbling over the inspection of the " presidential sites " conceals a vital issue : how to effectively express the international consensus against terrorism . 
by taking a unilateral decision , the United States leaves itself open to the criticism that it is acting as both judge and jury . 
however , if the cogs of war jam up this time , the lesson will be at least twofold . 
military force and its dissuasive effect may produce results in an area as crucial as the prohibition of the vectors of massive destruction . 
however , if the United States alone has the capability , the way it chooses to exercise it turns the rest of the world into a counterweight . 
this is a worthy subject for reflection in long periods of peace . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
income Tax Act 
motion Proposing an Amendment - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Meighen , seconded by the Honourable Senator Kirby : 
that the Senate urges the Government , in the February 1998 Budget , to propose an amendment to the Income Tax Act that would increase to 30 % , by increments of 2 % per year over a five - year period , the foreign property component of deferred income plans ( pension plans , registered retirement savings plans and registered pension plans ) , as was done in the period between 1990 to 1995 when the foreign property limit of deferred income plans was increased from 10 % to 20 % , because : 
( a ) Canadians should be permitted to take advantage of potentially better investment returns in other markets , thereby increasing the value of their financial assets held for retirement , reducing the amount of income supplement that Canadians may need from government sources , and increasing government tax revenues from retirement income ; 
( b ) Canadians should have more flexibility when investing their retirement savings , while reducing the risk of those investments through diversification ; 
( c ) greater access to the world equity market would allow Canadians to participate in both higher growth economies and industry sectors ; 
( d ) the current 20 % limit has become artificial since both individuals with significant resources and pension plans with significant resources can by - pass the current limit through the use of , for example , strategic investment decisions and derivative products ; and 
( e ) problems of liquidity for pension fund managers , who now find they must take substantial positions in a single company to meet the 80 % Canadian holdings requirement , would be reduced . 
- ( honourable Senator Kirby ) . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to rise today in support of the motions sponsored by Senator Meighen and Senator Kirby urging the Senate to ask the government to propose an amendment to the Income Tax Act that would increase to 30 per cent , by increments of 2 per cent a year over 5 years , the foreign property component of the deferred income plans - that is to say pension plans , registered retirement savings plans and registered pension plans . 
i am happy that Senator Gigant è s is here today . 
i will attempt to answer some of the questions that he asked of Senator Meighen during his presentation . 
i rise in support of this motion because I believe strongly in the importance of supporting initiatives designed to enhance the public policy debate to improve economic prospects for all Canadians . 
in the past five years , most Canadians with net savings of more than $ 10,000 have them in RRSPs or registered pension plans . 
any effort designed to enhance the net value of these plans for Canadians is , in my opinion at least , good public policy . 
on December 17 last , Senator Meighen gave an excellent professional overview of the need to relax the foreign property rule in order to permit average Canadians every opportunity to increase the value of their retirements savings . 
i found both the motion and explanation compelling , and encourage all honourable senators to take the time to review the Debates of the Senate of that day . 
... we must invest 80 per cent of our funds in the Canadian market and can only invest 20 per cent in the rest of the world . 
the Canadian market is only 3 per cent of the capitalized markets of the world and we have a fiduciary and trustee requirement to produce returns . 
however , we are limited to investing in a small part of the investible capital of the world . 
the foreign property rule really skews our investment process away from the objectives that we have mandated by trust and fiduciary law , and the statutory rules under which we operate , and it does it for reasons that are totally unrelated to the issues of prudence or safety in pension management . 
i share his view . 
some of my colleagues , however , raised some contrary arguments in this chamber , which I will attempt to address today . 
however , before addressing specific issues raised by my colleagues , I wish first to speak generally of the need to increase the foreign property rule from 20 to 30 per cent . 
as all honourable senators know , Ernst & Young released a study last October on the impact of an increase in the foreign property rule on investors ' returns . 
the study strongly concluded that , had the foreign property rule been increased to 30 per cent , ordinary Canadians would have realized higher returns , namely , another 1.6 per cent on their retirement savings . 
this is an important finding for the 5.2 million Canadians who contribute to RRSPs . 
some honourable senators may not be drastically moved by the thought of increased rates of return in the order of 1 or 2 per cent . 
a long - term 1 per cent increase in rates of return , however , increases a person ' s retirement savings upon retirement by about 20 per cent . 
in other words , if the foreign property rule had been increased to the level envisaged in this motion , the average portfolio of an individual ' s retirement savings could have been over 20 per cent greater today . 
i hasten to add , however - and I want to make it clear - that this does not prove that history will be an adequate forecast of the future . 
if we believe that Canadians can realistically expect real rates of return in the range of only 4 to 6 per cent , the importance of ensuring Canadians are not restrained by unsound public policy is much greater . 
Canadians are being asked to take increased responsibility for their own retirement planing . 
the reasons for this are obvious : demographic changes , economic changes , the size of the national debt , all resulting in pressure to reduce government spenders and future fiscal obligations . 
placing more responsibility on retirement savings on individuals , while at the same time restricting their rate of return , runs counter to good sense and good public policy . 
it is for this reason that I support the motion before us and the reasons contained therein , with particular emphasis on permitting Canadians more flexibility when investing their retirement savings , while reducing the risk of those investments through greater diversification . 
clearly , honourable senators , the lack of knowledge among the majority of Canadians regarding treatment of their retirement savings should be of concern to all legislators . 
the lack of awareness specifically relating to the foreign restriction being discussed here can be summarized under four headings : lack of awareness regarding investment opportunity ; lack of understanding about the long - term benefits of international diversification ; perception that foreign investment is too risky ; and lack of understanding of opportunities that lie in the global market - place . 
honourable senators , I will now focus on comments made by fellow senators in response to Senator Meighen ' s speech . 
turning to the argument put forward by Senator Gigant è s , namely that any change envisioned here will only assist the more wealthy in this country , I wish to point out that this argument seems inherently wrong . 
it has become abundantly clear to me over the last week , as the Banking Committee undertook , at the request of the Minister of Finance , its study of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board , that the foreign property rule will unduly restrain the returns of the investment fund . 
because of the limits applied to benefits and contributions of the CPP , restrictions will disproportionately affect low - and middle - income Canadians . 
the testimony heard by the Banking Committee can best be summarized by a witness the committee heard in Vancouver five days ago , who said : 
it makes no sense to impose such costs on a huge investment owned by the broad Canadian public ... such restrictions do nothing to lower domestic costs of capital or reduce the nation ' s net foreign indebtedness . 
several witnesses in Toronto , Calgary and Vancouver recommended strongly that the fund not be limited in its ability to invest in foreign assets . 
testimony relating to the banking committee ' s work has not been limited to witnesses . 
the media has also reported often on the need to increase the foreign property rule . 
as recently as last Friday , The Globe and Mail in its editorial reflected on the committee ' s work : 
plans to sterilize this market power by making domestic investment passive are ill - conceived and impossible to put into practice ... according 
to experts , passive index investing is an impossibility for a fund of this size in the Canadian market . 
these problems would disappear if the absurd 80 - per - cent rule were lifted . 
clearly , honourable senators , the CPP fund is all about the retirement of average Canadians . 
i do , however , wish to speak even more directly to the affect of the foreign property rule on main street Canadians . 
the key finding of a recent Conference Board of Canada study entitled " Maximizing Choice - Economic Impacts of Increasing the Foreign Property Rule " was that funds subjected to the foreign property rule represent only 24 per cent of the total investment pool , which may disproportionately affect those average income Canadians whose major savings vehicles are RRSPs and pension funds . 
three points require emphasis . 
first , it seems to me that as an individual ' s income increases , investments outside of registered plans increase and therefore are not constrained by this foreign restriction ; second , half of the 5.2 million Canadians who contribute to RRSPs earn less than $ 40,000 per year ; and , third , Canadians rely largely on investment managers to invest their retirement savings , all of whom support an increase in the foreign property rule as envisioned in the motion before us . 
honourable senators , over 8 million Canadians are either members of an employer pension plan or rely on RRSPs for much of their investment savings . 
for all these Canadians , the rate of return on their investments is directly or indirectly limited by the foreign property rule . 
accordingly , the foreign property rule imposes a real monetary cost on Canadians - a cost that is not realized until such time as an individual retires and is likely not to be in a position to make up the shortfall . 
senator Gigant è s stated that the rule as stated by Senator Meighen be stated in plain language . 
let me try putting it this way : 
by investing in foreign property , Canadians can participate in industries that are not readily available in Canada , such as certain areas of technology or health care . 
Canadians can also invest in cycles and also in markets that may be at different stages in the investment cycle than Canada or that offer greater growth potential . 
all this points to the possibility of higher returns with greater diversification and therefore less risk for Canadians . 
in short , Senator Gigant è s , this motion is about real people - average Canadians who are concerned about providing for their own retirement and who largely are unaware that poor public policy is leading to lower returns and therefore lower levels of savings available upon retirement . 
i wish to turn now to remarks by Senator Taylor and to a lesser extent Senator Gustafson . 
specifically , Senator Taylor states that money in registered plans should stay in Canada and be spent in Canada or made available to Canadian capitalists , and so forth . 
these remarks may be properly categorized as reflecting economic nationalism . 
i hope Senator Taylor will not suggest that I , too , am a financial shark because I believe capital markets should be , and are by their nature , global . 
i preface my response by saying that if Canada is to prosper in the 21 st century , it must learn to function in this new global world . 
for this reason , a consensus has developed among those knowledgeable about capital market issues that the foreign property rule is harmful and only distorts investments . 
let me respond to the economic nationalists from a public policy perspective , since the foreign property rule gives rise to two public policy issues . 
first , the onus is on the government and others who support such a restriction to prove that the restrictions on the earning potential of Canadians attempting to save for their retirement can be justified by the benefits that the foreign property rule generates for Canada as a whole . 
to date , we have seen no proof of this . 
second , if there are such benefits , it should be shown that it is equitable that the restrictions apply only to Canadians using retirement savings vehicles and not to all Canadian investors . 
more generally , the Conference Board of Canada found that raising the limit on the foreign property rule will not increase Canada ' s net international debt position , that presently it imposes a real cost on Canadians and creates an inefficiency in financial markets by restricting the free flow of capital . 
honourable senators , there is no evidence that interfering with normal market forces creates more economic activity or more permanent high value - added jobs . 
it seems to me from the experience of Canada that the opposite is true . 
canada ' s experiences in trying to increase R & D spending and venture capital for small - and medium - sized business , as Senator Taylor supports , have not been effective and have largely benefited only the intermediaries and not those targeted by such initiatives . 
the original justification for the foreign property rule as stated by the Conference Board of Canada dates from a period when government was more closely involved in providing resources to selected sectors of the Canadian economy , and when there was concern about the ability of Canadian governments and corporations to secure sufficient access to sources of capital . 
since then , however , an era of globalization has provided Canadian institutions with unlimited access to the world ' s capital markets . 
it is for this reason that governments are pursuing open market agendas through bilateral , regional and multilateral trade agreements instead of inward - looking , closed - door market agendas . 
as honourable senators know , the North American Free Trade Agreement is the first trade agreement anywhere that has an entire chapter devoted to competition law . 
i suggest to senators here today that we will see this chapter expanded in the next round of negotiations . 
as the NAFTA is premised on the free flow of capital in the North American economies and since this is seen as a desirable goal , the removal of the foreign property rule is a logical next step . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i regret to interrupt the Honourable Senator Oliver , but it being six o ' clock , is there an agreement that I not see the clock ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Oliver , I regret to also inform you that your 15 - minute time period has expired . 
is leave granted to allow the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , before closing , I wish to address Senator Taylor ' s concern that the move to increase the foreign property rule is an orchestrated lobby on the part of investment advisors . 
honourable senators , those most concerned with the restrictions are those professionals who manage the bulk of retirement savings in Canada through pension and mutual funds . 
i close , honourable senators , by saying that Senator Taylor ' s concerns about investing in risky individual stocks is not a reason to argue for maintaining the foreign property rule , rather an argument for increasing or even eliminating the restriction to permit greater diversification through global investing . 
i encourage all honourable senators to support the motion . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lorna Milne moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to sit on 3:15 on Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 , even though the Senate may then be sitting and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I would ask Senator Milne why she feels it desirable to have this resolution of the Senate . 
we have been over this ground again and again . 
we all know that there is an understanding that when we meet at 1:30 p.m. on Wednesdays , it is so the Senate can rise at about three o ' clock in order to allow the committees to carry out their work for the rest of the afternoon , specifically to allow committees to meet at 3:15 p.m. 
i think I understand why Senator Milne has proposed this motion . 
i wonder if she is not , by proposing this motion , creating what in business circles they call a moral hazard . 
by carrying the motion , in a sense we subscribe to the known view of some senators that , even though we have met at 1:30 , we should continue well beyond three o ' clock . 
perhaps Senator Milne will undertake to dispel the fears that her motion has aroused . 
senator Milne : 
honourable senators , I cannot dispel them ; I can only acknowledge them . 
in fact , that is why I am on my feet and making this motion . 
in anticipation of the goodwill that Senator Kinsella offered from the other side earlier this afternoon , and in the absence so far of a non - debatable method by which this house can count on rising every Wednesday at 3:00 p.m. or 3:15 p.m. , I am placing this motion today . 
the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs has witnesses from the Canadian Bar Association appearing before it tomorrow , at least one of whom , I have been given to believe , is unable to change further commitments . 
in view of the recent record of this house , I am asking that this motion be passed . 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I would normally support a motion of this nature , but I am concerned that we may take the excitement out of the place if we pass such a motion and provide for some certainty here . 
i wonder if Senator Milne would have any comment on that . 
senator Milne : 
i have no comment other than that this place provides quite enough excitement for my nerves already . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 43 
Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Unity 
the Canada Tree 
health 
increasing Incidence of Osteoporosis in the Population 
visible Minorities in Canada 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian War Museum 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
twelfth Report of Committee Presented 
agriculture and Forestry 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
the Budget 1998 
statement of Minister of Finance - Inquiry 
visitors in the Gallery 
question PERIOD 
post - Secondary Education 
workplace Restrictions on Eligibility for Grants for Millennium Scholarship Fund - Government Position 
the Budget 
possible Reduction in Payroll Taxes - Government Position 
efficacy of Proposed Tax Reduction - Government Position 
inequity of Tax Policy Towards Non - Working Mothers - Government Position 
human Rights 
percentage of Visible Minorities In Public Service - Request for Answer 
science , Research and Development 
budgets of Research Institutions - Inadequacy of Increase Announced in Budget Compared to Levels in Other Countries - Government Position 
post - Secondary Education Immediate Availability of Funds from Millenium Scholarship Fund - Government Position 
visitor in the Gallery 
orders OF THE DAY 
canada Cooperatives Bill 
third Reading 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
international Assembly of French - Speaking Parliamentarians 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
senator Andrew Thompson - Consideration of Second Report of Committee - Order Stands 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
national Unity 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , yesterday , our colleague Senator LeBreton reminded us that in 1993 the 24 th Prime Minister of Canada resigned . 
five years later to the day , thanks to the political leadership of Mr. Mulroney , the Minister of Finance was able to present a balanced budget . 
that was possible because of Prime Minister Mulroney ' s vision , leadership and energetic decision - making . 
i am thinking most particularly of the implementation of a restructured economic infrastructure and a modern economy , such elements as replacing the sales tax on manufactured goods by the GST , and the free trade agreements . 
the budget ' s success is built on those policies . 
in the decisions made by Mr. Mulroney , we can see his courage in implementing policies that won him no popularity contests . 
they were , however , the right decisions for our country ' s future . 
where national unity is concerned , we see the same quality of leadership . 
i remember his statement to the members of the Newfoundland House of Assembly : 
when we look at our children we will think : " Could we have avoided all of this through Meech Lake ? " 
if that night were ever to come , the terms of the Meech Lake accord would look very reasonable to every member of every house of assembly across Canada . 
the Canada Tree 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , a special kind of tree has taken root on Canadian soil - the Canada Tree . 
it has sprung from the imagination of a creative young sculptor from Prince Edward Island , Tyler Aspin . 
Mr. Aspin has travelled across Canada collecting pieces of wood which carry with them special stories of cultural significance to form the content of his sculpture of a tree . 
he began construction of the Canada Tree in June of 1997 in Charlottetown at the Confederation Centre for the Arts , where to date it has been viewed by over 30,000 visitors to the centre . 
the artist ' s aim was to develop a sculpture celebrating the history and spirit of Canada , and to create a conversation among Canadians in support of national unity . 
there are some wonderful and touching stories behind the artefacts incorporated into the tree : wood from the desk of Mr. George Coles , one of the Fathers of Confederation in 1867 ; a piece of a plank from the sailing schooner Bluenose , celebrated as the fastest ship in the world during the 1800 s ; a canoe paddle donated by the family and friends of Tanya Ritoul , who died tragically in a canoe accident last year . 
upon completion , the Canada Tree will weigh approximately 3,000 pounds and will be 35 feet high and 15 to 20 feet wide . 
the base of the tree is made of 250 - year - old red oak . 
the foundation of the tree , as the foundation of this great country , began in Prince Edward Island . 
the national debut for the Canada Tree will take place in the spring of 1998 at the Canadian Museum of Civilization . 
it is slated for a cross - Canada tour with the highlight that it will become part of the Canadian pavilion at Expo 2000 in Hanover , Germany . 
this however will not be the end for the tree . 
i applaud Tyler for his creativity as well as his dedication to his country . 
he is a proud Islander and a proud Canadian . 
health 
increasing Incidence of Osteoporosis in the Population 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
as the population ages , this number is sure to climb . 
the Government of Canada has stated that osteoporosis costs our health system about $ 400 million per year . 
health care professionals claim that the cost is closer to $ 1.3 billion . 
we know that osteoporosis is a thinning of bones over one ' s lifetime , which results in fractures in the senior years . 
we also know that the public needs to learn more about this disease . 
we know that much of the effects can be mitigated through good diet and exercise , starting at a young age . 
the young think that this is a disease of the elderly , and few know what precautions they should be taking . 
it is often after a fracture that seniors find out that they have osteoporosis . 
they , and their doctors , did not know that their bones had been thinning for the past 30 years or more , as testing for osteoporosis is not part of a routine physical examination . 
given the cost of treating osteoporosis , the fact that we need to learn more about it , and the knowledge that our population is aging , the 1995 announcement by the former minister of health of a five - year Canadian study of osteoporosis was welcomed as a step in the right direction . 
basic research in Canada is underfunded . 
we spend $ 8 per capita on medical research while the United States spends $ 66 per capita , and President Clinton wishes to double their research dollars . 
the objective of this study was to determine the extent and geographic distribution of osteoporosis and the related fractures , identify and rank the major risk factors associated with this disease and , finally , measure the impact of osteoporosis on quality of life and on the cost to our health system . 
the final objective , honourable senators , using the resulting data , is to develop strategies for prevention which will ultimately reduce the demand on our health services . 
now , without warning and after spending 3.5 million tax dollars , the government has cancelled the Seniors ' Independent Research Program of Health Canada . 
as a result , the government sponsorship of the osteoporosis study , which comprised about 50 per cent of the total funding , also ended , leaving the project half finished . 
i noted in yesterday ' s budget that the government intends to increase funding to research and health , but not until the turn of the century . 
this , however , does not help the lead research team in Montreal and the people at the nine other test sites , who have no way to keep the project afloat . 
it is this type of mishandling , honourable senators , which gives government funding for research a bad name and invites public criticism . 
when the government has spent $ 3.5 million in research , the public wants a finished project . 
they want results and they expect a final report . 
the Canadian public deserves better management of their tax dollars . 
visible Minorities in Canada 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , on February 17 , 1998 , Statistics Canada released a report on visible minorities in Canada showing that they numbered 3.2 million Canadians who identified themselves as a visible minority . 
this was significantly important to make page 1 of The Globe and Mail . 
the government must give serious consideration to these results , as they provide further evidence that the face of government must change , as the face of Canada is changing . 
in December last , I referred to the shocking lack of progress made towards employment equity for visible minorities in the federal public service . 
December ' s Treasury Board report on employment equity highlighted the fact that there were no major new initiatives to help visible minorities . 
this in itself was a shocking admission of failure and indicated a lack of determination to correct a serious problem . 
treasury Board used a benchmark employment equity figure of 9 per cent . 
the latest census data prove that percentage is not only low , it is inaccurate . 
statistics Canada used the same definition as that used in the Employment Equity Act to identify what percentage the population were visible minorities . 
today , the figure should read 11.2 per cent . 
that is a significant difference . 
using the new census data , we can see that we are now looking at the year 2030 . 
must visible minorities wait three more decades for employment equity at work ? 
on December 18 , 1997 , Senator Di Nino also stated a concern for the lack of visible minority representation on the payroll of the Senate . 
the Honourable Leader of the Government indicated that he would bring this matter to the attention of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration to determine what could be done . 
perhaps a report could be made on what steps have been taken to date . 
consistent with immigrant settlement patterns , almost all visible minorities , about 94 per cent , live in a metropolitan area ; seven out of ten living in Toronto , Vancouver , Montreal . 
Toronto is home to 42 per cent of the visible minority population of Canada ; 18 per cent live in Vancouver , 13 per cent live in Montreal , and Ottawa was 12 per cent . 
clearly our government offices in those cities do not reflect the numbers . 
the government must recognize that our public servants are the face of our government , and Canadians must see themselves reflected in that institution . 
three point two million visible minorities are waiting for action , are waiting for equality of opportunity . 
we will not wait another 30 years . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian War Museum 
hon. Lowell Murray , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Tuesday , November 25 , 1997 , to examine and report upon all matters relating to the future of the Canadian War Museum , including , but not restricted to , its structure , budget , name and independence , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration and the report thereon of that Committee are appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
LOWELL MURRAY 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Murray , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
twelfth Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , February 25 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
twelfth REPORT 
your committee has examined and approved the budget presented to it by the Standing Committees on Social Affairs , Science and Technology for the proposed expenditures of the said Committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 : 
professional and Special Services $ 5,500 
all Other Expenditures 1,000 
total $ 6,500 
respectfully submitted , 
WILLIAM ROMPKEY 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
agriculture and Forestry 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , February 26 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry have the power to sit at 3:30 p.m. , even though the Senate may then be sitting and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Budget 1998 
statement of Minister of Finance - Inquiry 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I rise today to call the attention of the Senate to the budget presented by the Minister of Finance in the House of Commons on February 24 , 1998 . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i had the pleasure of meeting with the delegation yesterday , and on behalf of all of my colleagues I wish to welcome you to the Senate . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
question PERIOD 
post - Secondary Education 
workplace Restrictions on Eligibility for Grants for Millennium Scholarship Fund - Government Position 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , my question concerns the Millennium Fund announced yesterday by the Minister of Finance . 
it may surprise you , but I will tell you honestly that this is a praiseworthy idea , yet the outcome may not be quite so clear . 
what will the government do to ensure that our graduates work in Canada and not in the U.S. after they leave university ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that there would be any restrictive measures put on the awarding of such scholarships , stipulating that those who receive them must stay in Canada . 
i believe that the scholarships will be awarded on merit by a foundation at arm ' s length from the government . 
it is to be hoped that the economic climate and the opportunity for employment in Canada will encourage those students who are the beneficiaries of this once - in - a - lifetime , first - of - its - kind scholarship foundation fund to stay in Canada . 
senator Nolin : 
at the University of Waterloo , 80 per cent of the students graduating from the faculty of science in the field of informatics are destined to work for Microsoft . 
what is the government planning to do to change or curb that problem ? 
this is an exodus . 
senator Graham : 
i am chairman of the Danny Gallivan Memorial Scholarship Fund . 
the scholarships are awarded at a great university in Nova Scotia known as St. Francis Xavier . 
the honorary chair of the scholarship fund is Senator Hartland Molson . 
i am sure Senator Molson would not mind if I reiterate that during that particular conversation , he said : " Only Canadians , because our game , the game of hockey , is slipping south of the border . " 
there is a relationship or an analogy in what Senator Nolin correctly identifies as a " brain drain " and in Senator Molson ' s view at that particular time of a talent drain with respect to hockey . 
however , as I said , all of these students will be encouraged by the environment and by the job opportunities of the necessity to contribute to the country from which they received their scholarships . 
senator Nolin : 
the business community is begging for a lowering of taxes , such as the tax on assurance - ch ô mage . 
does the Leader of the Government not agree that such a move would be a most important way of convincing job creators to provide those jobs for our young Canadians who will be graduating from those universities ? 
senator Graham : 
yes , and we are moving towards that goal , Senator Nolin . 
for the first time in over 30 years , we have a balanced budget in this country . 
it is the government ' s intention to have a balanced budget next year and the year after . 
it is to be hoped that that will create the kind of economic climate where there can be tax reductions at the appropriate times in our future . 
the Budget 
possible Reduction in Payroll Taxes - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , in the year 1999 , the government will collect $ 6 billion more from employment insurance contributions than it needs to run that program . 
the total value in that year of the various tax cuts announced in the budget will only be $ 3 billion , or roughly half the amount of extra money being collected through the high EI premiums . 
when can Canadians expect meaningful payroll tax relief ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as my honourable friend knows , we have reduced EI program rates every year since 1994 . From $ 3.30 in 1994 , as planned by the previous government , to $ 2.70 this year . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
keep on going . 
senator Graham : 
that is exactly what Senator Lynch - Staunton has suggested . 
the actuaries suggest that there must be a certain amount of money in the fund . 
senator Stratton : 
for employers , the combined Employment Insurance and Canada Pension Plan premiums will climb from $ 7.02 per $ 100 of earnings this year , to $ 7.54 in the year 2000 . 
would the minister inquire of his colleague the Minister of Finance if he still believes that when payroll taxes rise , it can have an effect on jobs ? 
would he also report to the Senate as to whether the government has done any study to determine the employment impact of the premium hike that will be imposed on employees and employers over the next two years ? 
senator Graham : 
as you know , in 1996 , we introduced a " new hires " program which provided EI premium relief to small firms to create jobs in 1997 and 1998 . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
he reads well , doesn ' t he ? 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I also have a question regarding the EI fund . 
four years ago , the Finance Minister said to Canadians that payroll taxes are a barrier to jobs . 
he recently said that they are not a barrier to jobs , that EI premiums do not have any effect on the employment roles . 
perhaps he would explain why he does not think EI premiums are a barrier to jobs . 
senator Berntson : 
while you are up , tell us about the GST . 
senator Graham : 
senator Berntson will have his turn , I am sure . 
it is important for us to understand that a reserve is needed because - 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is not the question . 
we must remember what happened in the last recession . 
the Employment Insurance account went from a surplus of $ 2 billion to a deficit of $ 6 billion in two years . 
premiums had to be increased by 30 per cent when jobs were already hard to create . 
i am saying that we are moving in the right direction . 
i have not seen any proof that a reduction in EI premiums will create more jobs , but regardless of how the economists may speculate and regardless of what Senator Tkachuk may put forward , the trend is in the right direction . 
senator Tkachuk : 
there is no cash in the fund . 
we all know that . 
we could get over this if there was actually an account holding $ 30 billion plus interest , but there is no such account . 
i am trying to get at the contradiction . 
although the government may believe that there are no economists who say that payroll taxes are a deterrent to jobs , we have this apparent contradiction about what the Finance Minister said four years ago and what he is saying today . 
i also noticed in the most recent budget an announcement with some fanfare that , for a two - year period , businesses would not be charged EI premiums for any additional young people they hire . 
obviously , the minister believes that not charging EI premiums is an incentive to jobs , but that keeping premiums at a higher rate is not a disincentive to jobs . 
would the leader explain how he can keep to the present position ? 
would he explain why eliminating the EI premiums in some cases would cause employers to hire more people ? 
senator Graham : 
efficacy of Proposed Tax Reduction - Government Position 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , incomes after taxes and inflation have been falling throughout the 1990 s . 
the most recent budget offers what , at first glance , looks like good news , a tax cut of up to $ 250 for modest - income earners . 
of course , this ignores the fact that the tax system is not fully indexed . 
more important , it does not even begin to cover the money that would be lost to higher Canada Pension Plan premiums . 
by the year 2000 , Canadians earning an average wage will pay $ 315 more in premiums than they would have in 1997 . 
as a result , take - home pay will continue to shrink . 
why is the government pretending that Canadians are getting a tax cut when their take - home pay will actually continue to shrink ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am delighted that Honourable Senator Jessiman has raised the question of the Canada Pension Plan . 
just before Christmas , we passed in this chamber a very important piece of legislation regarding the CPP , Bill C - 2 . 
now , for the first time in many years , we can say to Canadians , no matter what their age , and fathers and mothers can pass it on to their children , that there will be a Canada Pension Plan now and into the future , for them and for their children . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they need a job to be able to contribute to it . 
where are the jobs ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , one million new jobs were created in this country in the last 4 years . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
where ? 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
taxpayers are being told they are getting a tax break , while at the same time , inflation will completely take away that so - called tax break . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , there are no illusions in this budget . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
to reduce the deficit . 
senator Graham : 
the deficit went up and the surtax remained . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
then take it off if you do not need it anymore . 
you want another reserve . 
bring in the reserves . 
senator LeBreton : 
that was a very interesting little commentary , but the surtax was put on to reduce the deficit - and guess what : it worked . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , there seems to be a conflict between Senator LeBreton ' s figures and those of the people who put together the budget . 
i will err on the side of those who put together the budget . 
the honourable senator talks about the surtax reducing the deficit . 
when this government took office in 1993 , they inherited a $ 42 - billion deficit from the previous government . 
that $ 42 - billion deficit has been eliminated , so that we now have a balanced budget in the country for the first time in 30 years . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , that $ 42 - billion figure is like a mantra for Paul Martin and the Prime Minister . 
however , if you go back and check the records , they added to that . 
they took over the government in November , 1993 , piled on the spending and then ended up with a figure that they projected through from the time they took over until the beginning of the new fiscal year . 
senator Tkachuk : 
to reduce the deficit . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I listened with great interest to my friend Senator Kinsella ' s statement at the beginning of the proceedings this afternoon . 
i know that statements are not debatable , and that perhaps we should not comment upon them . 
however , if the opposition wants to take any credit for reducing the deficit and / or the debt and creating jobs , I say let them take it . 
the Canadian public are the ones who really know the truth , and understand which government and which party brought down the debt , reduced the deficit , and created the jobs . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is because you continued the Conservative policy . 
inequity of Tax Policy Towards Non - Working Mothers - Government Position 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the congratulations to the Finance Minister for balancing the budget must be shared by the Canadian people , who have lived with huge increases in personal and corporate taxes , the GST and the UI surpluses . 
one group which has shouldered an unfair share of this burden is families with stay - at - home mothers . 
in fact , there is a growing concern among women that their choices are being limited by Canadian taxation policy which refuses to acknowledge the value of women who choose to stay at home with their children . 
there is a serious discrepancy in this budget which discriminates against one - earner couples . 
my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I take the point that is being made by Senator Cohen because she is a very serious senator , and her reputation in the causes that she supports underscores that . 
we are very proud of this budget . 
we are very proud of the way in which the Minister of Finance , the Prime Minister and the government have conducted themselves responsibly over the last three or four years . 
i take the matter of stay - at - home mothers very seriously . 
i should say that , beginning July 1 , 1998 , the basic personal exemption will increase , meaning that 400,000 low - income Canadians will no longer pay any federal income tax . 
beginning July 1 , as I mentioned earlier , the 3 - per - cent general surtax will be eliminated . 
these two measures alone , Senator Cohen , will yield close to $ 1.4 billion in tax relief for 14 million low - and middle - income Canadians by the year 1999 - 2000 . 
ninety per cent of all taxpayers in the country will benefit . 
senator Cohen : 
i thank you for the compliment , and I appreciate what you are telling me , but that does not answer my question about the stay - at - home mothers . 
senator Tkachuk : 
he did not answer mine , either . 
senator Graham : 
i will treat the question as one requiring an answer . 
human Rights 
percentage of Visible Minorities In Public Service - Request for Answer 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , and it is really a follow - up question to a question I put to the leader last December when I expressed my concern about the lack of effort that had been made to meet the government ' s established objective of 9 per cent of visible minorities employed in the federal public service . 
the Honourable Leader of the Government will remember that he said at that time , in relation to Senator Di Nino ' s question about the employment of visible minorities in the Senate , that he would bring this matter to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration . 
perhaps the honourable leader could give us a response to that question now . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Oliver has raised again another very important concern . 
i have discussed that subject with the Chairman of Internal Economy . 
in fact , I reminded him of it earlier when Senator Oliver made his comments during Senators ' Statements . 
i am sure that he will be happy to bring Senator Oliver a report , and I know that all members of that committee will want to examine the honourable senator ' s concerns , and the concerns of all members of the chamber , very seriously . 
science , Research and Development 
budgets of Research Institutions - Inadequacy of Increase Announced in Budget Compared to Levels in Other Countries - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I rise with some trepidation because I do not know whether I meet the qualifying standard of being serious or not , but I am rising , anyway . 
last week I asked a question with regard to the fact that post - doctoral fellows were having to leave Canada because they were not being paid enough . 
i did get all excited about the budget , as did my friends opposite , but then I realized that the budget increase for the Medical Research Council is only 12 per cent , which raises the amount to $ 8.87 per capita : far short of what many in the scientific community had hoped for , and certainly not enough to stem the tide - or staunch the flow - of researchers moving south . 
does the Leader of the Government have anything to add to the announcements that were made in the budget that could perhaps make us feel a little more optimistic in relation to medical research funds which have been described by many as " too little , too late . " 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , every segment of society had to feel the pain and suffer the cut - backs in order to bring our fiscal house and management under control . 
i carried their representations to the government , the Minister of Finance in particular , and I believe the budget indicates that the medical research funds will be restored to the 1994 - 95 level , with a commitment that they will be increased each year thereafter . 
senator Spivak : 
i quite understand that , and I am sure that the leader has done his utmost . 
however , we will see a doubling of the $ 66 - per - capita figure in the United States , and we have only increased ours by 87 cents per capita . 
i am in touch with the doctors there . 
in Manitoba particularly , there is a legion of doctors , radiologists and others , leaving for other climes . 
perhaps my honourable friend could continue to use his influence to gain a speedier , more sizeable increase so that we can begin to measure up to the United States . 
senator Graham : 
i would be very happy to do so . 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the medical research community in Canada is very pleased with the increase in funding they received . 
they are also very pleased with the openness of the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Health , who have heard their pleas and taken into account what they had to say over the last six months or so . 
however , there is a truly serious problem here , and it is one of national priority . 
there is a significant problem arising in the G - 7 countries . 
the Americans , for example , fund medical research at the rate of about $ 66 per capita , and prior to this adjustment , we were funding medical research at the rate of about $ 8 per capita . 
this is not the fault of the present government ; this has been going on for a very long time . 
to overcome this situation will require long - term planning and an awareness in the country that the situation must be dealt with if we are to receive the industrial spin - offs that we should receive from medical research and the benefits that the health care system should accrue . 
senator Graham : 
Yes. 
i understand the concerns expressed by the Honourable Senator Keon . 
most particularly , we must provide our researchers with adequate funds so that we can not only keep up to speed , so to speak , but also prevent the so - called brain drain to other countries . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , the Senate ' s recently completed study on post - secondary education touches exactly on this matter . 
could the Leader of the Government explain whether the government took into account the fact that training has been moved into the provincial field ? 
education traditionally has been a provincial field . 
unless we have a good dialogue and develop a national strategy , we will not be able to attack the long - term issues . 
could my honourable friend explain why the government took this approach , which is so short - sighted and so short - term , as the Senate study , I think , adequately points out ? 
the Senate study was based on information supplied by experts , researchers , and the people who deal with the medical council in these areas on a daily basis . 
they brought the information to the Senate and it made eminent sense ; the situation was urgent . 
i think it was underlined in the report . 
why would the government not have addressed it , incorporating all levels of government ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not think it is a question of the government ignoring the report of the Special Committee on Post - Secondary Education . 
on the contrary , I think that was one of the driving forces and one of the factors considered when the Prime Minister announced the Millennium Fund for Scholarships . 
i think the Senate can take a good deal of credit for the excellent report it made on post - secondary education . 
i am sure its findings will be taken into consideration as these efforts and initiatives are further enhanced in the future . 
post - Secondary Education Immediate Availability of Funds from Millenium Scholarship Fund - Government Position 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , last year the Auditor General criticized the government for booking the $ 800 - million cost of the Innovation Fund to the books for fiscal 1996 - 97 as the money was not spent that year . 
the government calls this transparency ; others call it creative accounting . 
the previous year , the Auditor General questioned the government ' s decision to book the $ 1 - billion cost of harmonizing the GST to the 1995 - 96 fiscal year as the money was not spent that year . 
this year ' s budget announced that $ 2.5 billion will be spent on the Millennium Scholarship Fund . 
why will the government not spend this $ 2.5 million now to help students with huge debt loads or to help hundreds of unemployed youths find jobs ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a very good question . 
i think that it is a difference between the Auditor General questioning whether a particular sum for a particular program is booked in one year rather than another . 
it is a difference in accounting principles . 
it is a difference between people at the Department of Finance and those at the Department of the Auditor General . 
i guess one can regard it as a fair difference of opinion . 
at the same time , the Minister of Finance is booking the Millennium Scholarship Fund for this year , and it will be inaugurated in the year 2000 . 
he obviously has good , sound reasons for doing so because the money is available to be booked at this particular time . 
it may be that if the accounts are in such great shape , the government might be persuaded to start the scholarship program at an earlier time than the year 2000 , but we will leave that to the future . 
i will certainly bring my honourable friend ' s concerns and suggestions to the attention of my colleagues because I know she has always had a very particular interest in the field of education . 
visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to a distinguished visitor in the Speaker ' s Gallery , the Honourable Glenn Hagel , Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan , my neighbour . 
orders OF THE DAY 
canada Cooperatives Bill 
third Reading 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Taylor , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill C - 4 , to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , this afternoon I rise to speak on Bill C - 4 , the bill to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act . 
as everyone is aware , there has been quite an interesting debate in the other place on this proposed act . 
our committee met last week and determined that the best way for us to receive the appropriate background as to the basis of the changes to the act was to travel . 
originally , the proposal was that we would travel to Winnipeg , Saskatoon , Regina , and Edmonton . 
however , we still feel that that is not enough , and that we should go more into the rural areas . 
i recommend strongly to the committee that we cancel Winnipeg and go to Brandon instead , for example . 
i will not debate the details of Bill C - 4 . 
that has been done very well by other speakers before me . 
however , I should like to focus on a few pertinent issues or amendments that were proposed in the other place but not adopted . 
in other words , the accountability factor in Bill C - 4 is missing . 
the wheat board produces an annual audited statement but , as we all know from audited statements , those statements can be read in many ways by many different people . 
the farmers who grow the wheat and other products sold by the wheat board need to have access to the process to ensure that there is a watch kept on this system . 
where is the accountability to ensure that the board is being properly managed ? 
right now , we simply have an audited statement . 
that does not necessarily mean that the board is being appropriately managed . 
with reference to the deletion of the inclusion - exclusion clauses from Bill C - 4 , I should like to quote from a letter from the Premier of Manitoba , my province , to the Honourable Jean Chr é tien on November 17 , 1997 , which states : 
i have great concern over the " Inclusion Clause " of Bill C - 4 , as it embodies the antithesis of what Canada has already accepted with regard to free trade . 
indeed , the move toward even more open markets is underscored through agreements such as the Canada / U.S. Free Trade Agreement , the North American Free Trade Agreement , and the broader General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade . 
these agreements , in which Canada participates to our collective benefit , require us to embrace the establishment of an economy that is more responsive to market forces . 
for that reason , I believe that the " Inclusion Clause " of Bill C - 4 represents a significant step backward for the growing agricultural sector of Canada ' s economy . 
as you , I , and all Premiers have witnessed first - hand during our Team Canada trade missions , the international trend in all economic sectors is toward more open market structures . 
however , the " Inclusion Clause " in Bill C - 4 provides a mechanism that could empower the Canadian Wheat Board ( CWB ) not only to protect its current interests but to expand the scope of its mandate . 
by adopting it the Federal Government would be sending an inconsistent signal to Canada ' s trading partners around the world . 
that letter clearly states the concerns of the Province of Manitoba , which should be addressed when the Senate committee travels to that province . 
concerns have been expressed as well by the Premier of Alberta in a letter on November 25 , 1997 to the Honourable Jean Chr é tien , wherein he says the same thing . 
it ignores the wishes of the Alberta Legislature and the wishes of Alberta farmers as expressed in the plebiscite on grain marketing choice , as well as in a number of polls done on farmers - one conducted by your own government . 
i repeat : 
premier Klein has expressed concern about the exclusion - inclusion clause . 
the purpose of allowing the open market on these other grains is that they are a cash crop . 
as well , the purpose of opening up the markets is that we will then have a value - added basis in Western Canada . 
instead of being hewers of wood , drawers of water and growers of grain who ship it off somewhere else to be processed , we are now able to process these products in our own provinces , which is a highly value - added capability that increases the job numbers significantly . 
with Bill C - 4 and the exclusion - inclusion clause , there is a concern about industries that are thinking of setting up processing plants in these areas . 
once they see an inclusion clause in particular , there is concern that they would be reticent to establish their plants here , knowing full well that , on a whim on behalf of the minister or the CEO of the board , the regulations can be changed , and thus their investment will be dramatically affected . 
that is their concern . 
i think it is a real concern , and it is one that must be addressed . 
as well , a coalition of 14 members of the Wheat Growers are against Bill C - 4 , to which Senator Gustafson referred earlier in his speech . 
it is not so much that they are against Bill C - 4 but , once again , they are concerned about the exclusion - inclusion clause contained in the bill . 
for the same reasons that I explained , you cannot have an inclusion clause without dramatically affecting the attitudes of industry to put plants in the area , particularly if your push is towards free trade . 
free trade is very successful in Manitoba , and very successful in the west . 
we want our products to move freely . 
the coalition against Bill C - 4 includes the Alberta Canola Producers Commission , the BC Grain Producers Association , the Canadian Federation of Independent Business , the Flax Growers of Western Canada , the Manitoba Canola Growers Association , and so on - including the Winnipeg Commodity Exchange . 
they expressed their concerns in a letter to the Honourable Ralph Goodale on January 30 , 1998 , wherin they stated , in part : 
in defence of Bill C - 4 and the inclusion - exclusion clause , MP John Harvard went out to the Wheat Growers ' convention in Kananaskis and stated : 
with people on both the right and left criticizing the bill , we would like to think we have struck the right balance . 
that was MP Harvard ' s approach , that everyone hates the bill so therefore it should be good . 
above all , Mr. Harvard reiterated : 
the weak defences for the so - called ` inclusion clause ' that sets out how more crops can be brought under the control of the Wheat Board : 
if farmers don ' t want any more crops under the CWB control , it won ' t happen . 
so why are we complaining ? 
be happy . 
that is the defence on the side of the government from MP John Harvard . 
we are really concerned that what you are seeing and hearing out there is that these growers and producers are showing a lack of trust in the government . 
that is the true message behind all this . 
they are looking at the bill and saying to government : " Look , you guys , we must build trust in the beginning . 
when you add an inclusion clause such as this , all you do is get our antennae up and our backs up in such a way that we can become very concerned because we are afraid that you will come in and add crops to the inclusion clause to the detriment of the producers . " 
that is their inherent fear , and it is one to which we should pay attention when our committee is out there travelling . 
it is very important that we do that . 
the Canadian Grain Commission recently released their business plan for 1997 / 98 . 
i would like to commend the Commissioners for sharing their visions of the challenges they face and their strategy for the future . 
the big thing in this push , as Mr. Hawkins states , is : 
... the emphasis of our competitors on quality , meeting customerdemands of individual product specifications , changing processing technology and increased concerns over food safety . 
in order to survive , we now have to have a wider array of consistent , high quality products . 
marketing that wide array is taking place in a world that is vastly different than it was a few years ago . 
he goes on to say : 
i can assure you that other countries will beat us up in that marketplace . 
they are nimble and quick - innovative - while we say it has to be done the old way . 
as the entrepreneurial spirit blossoms in China , so too will the demand for choice - in products and in partners . 
growth is occurring in Latin America , where the Brazilian milling industry is now privatized . 
and , the market in the Middle East has taken off . 
... it will require a marketing environment that is flexible and able to respond quickly , yet is still capable of delivering the consistent quality for which we are famous . 
i look at Mr. Hawkins ' comments and wonder if what we are building here is another system where the concerns expressed by the producers will handcuff the ability of the industry to adapt quickly to the ever - increasingly rapid changes to the market . 
hon. John G . Bryden : 
i wonder if Senator Stratton would accept a question . 
senator Stratton : 
certainly . 
senator Bryden : 
i am a little hesitant . 
it is bad enough to be involved in fish on the East Coast without getting involved in the wheat board , except that I am a member of the committee . 
the little bit that I have heard is that the Canadian Wheat Board , over the years - and indeed today - is a single - desk marketer , and it has a very good reputation in world markets . 
is that your understanding , Senator Stratton ? 
senator Stratton : 
i would not disagree with that at all . 
i do not think that people are necessarily arguing for doing away with the wheat board . 
that is not what I am talking about here . 
it is the addition , in this bill , of the inclusion clause , which means that the commission can add products ; it can add canola to a single market or a single desk . 
farmers want the ability to sell a cash crop . 
they do not wish to have to do it through the Wheat Board because , like everyone else , it is wonderful to be able to go and sell something in order to have a little extra money the odd time . 
that is completely understandable . 
freedom in the market - place is becoming more and more evident because of what is happening in Manitoba and Saskatchewan . Farmers are breaking the law by driving straight across the border and selling their wheat in the United States - and then getting arrested , tried and fined . 
we have that reality facing us , and when you send a message like the inclusion clause out in this bill , that just raises their concerns and suspicions about what the government will do next . 
that is what it is about . 
senator Bryden : 
farmers are concerned that crops would be included or excluded at the whim of the minister or the CEO of the board . 
as I read the bill , the initiation of either an inclusion or an exclusion must come from the growers of the particular crop involved . 
without that initiative , then the board does not act and , finally , no action is taken until there is a vote by at least all of the growers who would be affected . 
if I am not mistaken , the way in which I read the bill , it seems to me that there would be a vote among all the farmers who are part of the wheat board . 
senator Stratton : 
the concern , of course , is with respect to a particular product , say canola , that 80 per cent of the product may be grown by 20 per cent of the growers . 
in other words , a large volume is produced by a small number of growers , and a large number of growers produce a small volume . 
the concern then is how is the vote set up and taken . 
how is the question worded ? 
is it a weighted vote because I grow three times as much canola as you do , or is it a straight one - on - one vote ? 
that is a concern that I think is real and honest on their part . 
senator Bryden : 
one further question . 
i would assume that it is possible to determine that , short of a reference to the court on this question , either in the bill or in a regulation under the bill which would be voted on by the growers . 
is it done on a per - bushel basis , or is it done on a per - registered - grower basis ? 
my comment would be that perhaps those types of specific concerns could be overcome . 
senator Stratton : 
when we are travelling , we must ensure that when questions are brought forward , they are delivered to the minister responsible . 
we must receive his assurance that these issues will be addressed . 
people deserve concrete answers . 
the simplest way to have assurance is to remove the exclusion and inclusion clauses . 
then we will not have this problem or concern . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , debate adjourned . 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the consideration of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , tabled in the Senate on December 16 , 1997 . - ( 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Forest for yielding to me . 
honourable senators , I rise with pleasure today in support of the final report on post - secondary education . 
improving the quality and relevance of education and training must be our most important priority if Canada is to prosper in the global economy . 
over 18 months , it became evident that the mandate of our committee was quite broad and that we could not possibly develop recommendations for every facet of this complex subject . 
however , we were able to address most of the main concerns brought before the committee and make appropriate recommendations . 
i should like to take this opportunity to discuss two areas of particular interest and concern to me : financial aid and prior learning assessment . 
i understand that some of the other senators on the committee have spoken to other aspects and recommendations . 
therefore , I will address my comments to these two areas . 
the first issue is the significant need for more bursaries and grants . 
it is important to first identify the two different groups of students . 
there is the group comprising 40 per cent of the student population that relies on commercial or government - sponsored loans and the remaining 60 per cent of the students fall into the group that acquires its education without visible loans . 
these students often make decisions that will allow them to avoid taking commercial or government loans . 
they may decide to stay at home in order not to have to pay room and board . 
their parents may lend them money which they are expected to repay . 
these students should be commended for their decisions , yet should not be overlooked for bursaries and grants . 
we should be encouraging our youth to study in other cities in order to help them develop skills essential to the global economy . 
it is upsetting to hear that some students are deterred from even starting school because they fear high debts when they graduate . 
this trend points to the need for starting grants to encourage potential students to take their first steps . 
consequently , the committee recommended that the special opportunities grants under the Canada Student Loans program be expanded to include remission grants , ranging from $ 1,000 to $ 2,000 per year , to be awarded to high - needs students on the successful completion of their first and second years of study . 
honourable senators , we thought this was a very important point . 
it is no wonder that the issue of indebtedness is of huge concern to our students . 
many feel their debts have gone beyond their capacity to cope . 
the average debt of those who borrow is expected to reach $ 17,000 this year and increase to $ 25,000 
it was incredible to hear young people giving evidence before the committee to the effect that they were looking at a debt of $ 40,000 over a four - year program . 
this seemed quite discouraging . 
it does nothing for the self - esteem of students who , even when they find a job , must spend the first years of their working lives paying off these huge debts . 
the committee sympathized with the students ' fears and agreed that there is a need for greater flexibility for borrowing and the repayment of their loans based on their ability to pay . 
the committee also thinks a one - time grant for those with chronic difficulty in paying off their loans is necessary . 
the purpose of such a grant would be to reduce the debt principal enough for the borrower to repay the loan based on his or her income . 
the grant would go directly to the financial institution holding the loan . 
in our hearings , we also discovered strong support for a harmonized federal - provincial loan system . 
from what members of the committee heard , the present structure is very frustrating for students trying to obtain loans , especially when they must deal with both provincial and federal bureaucracies . 
as a result , the the committee recommended that we move to a one - student , one - loan system in order to promote accessibility to those in need , provide administrative harmonization , encourage interprovincial and international mobility and share costs between the two levels of government . 
the committee also felt that it is important that students be counselled about their debt - servicing obligations and receive each year a comprehensive statement of what they owe and to whom they owe it , as well as the monthly payment that would be necessary . 
students who must pay for their education through commercial or government loans also need the opportunity to receive grants or bursaries in order to help offset their debt load when they graduate . 
if some students are deterred from pursuing post - secondary education because of the perceived debt load , we must provide incentives for them to pursue their studies . 
honourable senators , when deciding on policy options , three different types of assistance can be offered to help finance students . 
we can give them grants or bursaries when they begin their study , in order to ease their transition into school ; we can offer them assistance during that period of study ; or we can help them in their school - to - work transition . 
obviously , there is no one solution that will cover every student . 
there needs to be a mixture of all three alternatives . 
the support offered students in the budget has met with mixed reaction by the students . 
some students say scholarships in 2001 will not help them now . 
the jury will be out for a while on this one , and on behalf of the students I hope it proves favourable . 
many Canadians still have the naive impression that once they have graduated from a program of study , for example , chemistry , engineering or sociology , they will have skills that will last for a lifetime and will always be able to find work in their field . 
this is simply no longer the case . 
in order for Canada to stay competitive in an age of rapidly changing technologies and demographics , we must develop ways for our education system to be portable and accessible for students across the country . 
this is particularly important given that our country is presently faced with high unemployment and underemployment . 
in such an economy , people may have to switch jobs and careers several times during the course of their working lives , and they must be given the opportunity to adequately prepare themselves for these new challenges . 
i should like to speak about prior learning assessment and recognition , one of the ways we can encourage the so - called lifelong learning that has become key to improving the prospects of Canadian workers . 
PLAR assists adults in identifying the skills they have developed outside the formal education system and enables people to gain recognition and credit for what they already know and can do . 
it also recognizes that the path of learning has many branches . 
people learn at work . 
they learn in their communities through volunteer work and other activities . 
they learn at home , and they learn in the classroom . 
simply put , PLAR aims to end the roadblocks between formal and informal learning . 
i am sure honourable senators would like to know how PLAR works . 
i can use myself as an example . 
early in my career , I was an assistant to my husband , a dentist . 
i also assisted him at the chair and learned the skills of dental hygienist . 
if I had subsequently chosen to become a certified dental hygienist , PLAR would have allowed me to apply the knowledge that I had already learned towards my formal education . 
i would therefore get credit for that training and could pursue courses that would further my education and increase my skill level . 
as a result , I would have been able to qualify in a shorter period of time and at less cost , and I would not have had to reinvent the wheel . 
i would also like to share with you an example that was included in the September 1997 issue of The Learning Quarterly published by the Centre of Curriculum Transfer and Technology . 
it describes the case of a child and youth care worker in British Columbia who had a diploma in early childhood education from Britain , as well as many years of experience in her field . 
as a result of the prior learning assessment , she was awarded a diploma in child and youth care that enabled her to enter the third year of a Bachelor of Social Work program at university . 
she said that PLAR provided a leap forward , accelerating progress towards her goal . 
what had looked like an endless process now appeared attainable . 
honourable senators , this example highlights the fact that prior learning assessment has the potential to encourage would - be students to pursue academic goals . 
it can prevent them from becoming discouraged and being deterred from further studies by the prospect of spending years and years in the classroom . 
it is clear to me that the Canadian economy and our society as a whole will benefit from a system that will result in more workers pursuing post - secondary education . 
as you can see , prior learning assessment and recognition offers both employers and individuals an efficient , flexible , and cost - effective method of providing and receiving education and training . 
the Special Senate Committee on Post - secondary Education was pleased to note that some provinces are beginning to implement this program , notably British Columbia , Saskatchewan , and my own province of New Brunswick . 
i would now like to say a few words about jurisdictional considerations . 
while some people might think that PLAR should be the sole concern of the provinces , I believe the federal government has a large role to play in nurturing these types of programs and ensuring portability of skills and accessibility to institutions from province to province . 
one idea that has been presented to me in the past , and I think it is worth pursuing , is a passport of learning , where every experience and skill that a holder has developed is recorded . 
the PLAR system includes a similar idea using what is called a " portfolio . " 
the approach in both these instances is to give people credit for their accomplishments in three key areas of their lives : in school , through paid and unpaid work , and in their leisure pursuits . 
it values past learning and skills gained through life and work experiences as well as through formal education and training . 
a passport of learning , for example , would be used to keep track of accomplishments , similar to but much more comprehensive than a resum é . 
it would be continually updated throughout a lifetime of learning . 
furthermore , it would be portable among jurisdictions and between different milieu such as school and the workplace . 
thus , the PLAR approach responds to a number of key elements relevant to Canada ' s current economic , organizational and labour - market realities . 
apparently , the Canadian academic population feels that money is the answer to all our education problems , and we heard that over and over again in our hearings . 
we must somehow change the focus to accountability , vision , long - range planning , and incentive . 
yes , money is one of the most important assets to education programs and to our students , but it is not the whole answer . 
they must work in tandem with each other . 
i pray that the government in its wisdom will take our recommendations into consideration and that we will be able to help our students out of their debt dilemma . 
i would like to express my sincere appreciation to the senators who sat on the Post - Secondary Education Committee and the staff for the work accomplished by that committee . 
it was a tremendous learning experience . 
on motion of Senator Forest , debate adjourned . 
international Assembly of French - Speaking Parliamentarians 
leave Having Been Given to Revert to Tabling of Reports by Inter - Parliamentary Delegations . 
hon. Pierre De Ban é : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 23 ( 6 ) , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian section of the International Assembly of French - Speaking Parliamentarians as well as the financial report of the meeting of the IAFSP executive , held in Pointe - à - Pitre , Guadeloupe , December 14 and 15 , 1997 . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
senator Andrew Thompson - Consideration of Second Report of Committee - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Maheu , seconded by the Honourable Senator Moore , for the adoption of the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders ( Senator Thompson ) , presented in the Senate on February 11 , 1998 , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Ghitter , seconded by the Honourable Senator Stratton , that the Report be amended by deleting all of the words following the second paragraph and substituting therefor the following : 
that Senator Andrew Thompson be expelled from the Senate forthwith and that no further amounts be remitted to him for either his sessional indemnity or tax - free allowance . 
and on the subamendment of the Honourable Senator Lawson , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier , that the motion in amendment be amended by adding thereto : 
that the debate on the motion in amendment be adjourned until the Senate Law Clerk has rendered an opinion on its legality ; and 
that the Law Clerk report his opinion to the Senate by tomorrow . - ( 
honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
honourable senators , since the matter of the attendance of Senator Thompson was decided by the Senate last week , I move , pursuant to rule 30 , with leave of the Senate , that this order be discharged and the motion withdrawn . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , there are two amendments moved by absent members . 
i think we would need their approval before dispensing . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i must say that I was of the same view as the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
i asked the table for their advice . 
they tell me they have researched the item and that indeed , if the original main motion is withdrawn , so are the amendments automatically , if there are no objections . 
obviously , if there are objections , then we will not proceed . 
it can only be done by leave . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
the procedure is quite correct , but I would have thought that those who proposed the amendments would have been consulted first , and then we could have proceeded with dropping the item . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i gather that there are objections , in which case the matter will stand . 
we will await the return of the senators involved . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I would certainly have suggested , had our leader not done so , on behalf of my colleague Senator Ghitter , to the chair of the committee that she consult the two colleagues whose amendments form part of this item on the Order Paper to get their approval at least , after which I think the matter can be dealt with in this chamber again . 
senator Maheu : 
i will leave it until we return after the break . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the order stands . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 44 
Thursday , February 26 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Honourable Richard J . Doyle 
tributes on Retirement 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
agriculture and Forestry 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Honourable Stanley Haidasz , P . C . 
tributes on Retirement 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the New Civil Code of Quebec 
clause 35 
national Unity 
the Honourable Lucien Bouchard - Politics in Quebec 
the Late W . O . Mitchell , P . C . 
tribute 
the Senate 
privileges of Senators 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
scrutiny of Regulations 
second Report of Standing Joint Committee Tabled 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
thirteenth Report of Committee Presented 
adjournment 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
first Reading 
question PERIOD 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
justice 
young Offenders Act - Request for Changes by Province of Saskatchewan - Government Position 
agriculture 
wheat Board - Amount of Unpaid Balance Owing - Government Position 
health 
cancellation of Research Study on Seniors with Osteoporosis - Possibility of Restoration of Funding - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
twelfth Report of Committee of Committee Adopted 
ninth Report of Committee Adopted 
aboriginal Governance 
consideration of Report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services - Report Adopted 
rights of the Unborn Child 
motion to Establish Special Joint Parliamentary Committee - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate 
tributes 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
the SENATE 
Thursday , February 26 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Honourable Richard J . Doyle 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I doubt if anyone here was surprised that media reports of last week ' s decision by the Senate to suspend one of its members gave priority to the fact that a number of senators were absent when the vote was taken . 
this allowed our flourishing cottage industry in Senate - bashing to renew its campaign to convince Canadians that the only criterion for evaluating the contribution of senators is the number of times they are present in the chamber . 
attendance is attainment ; absence is abdication . 
in the minds of these Senate pit bulls , whose excessive rhetoric is surpassed only by their ignorance of the workings of this place in particular , and of Parliament in general , tally sheets of attendance form the sole valid record by which one is to be evaluated . 
as a result , none of us is immune from the wrath of these misguided parliamentary purists , whose pocket calculators at this very moment are no doubt updating our attendance records . 
take Senator Doyle , for instance . 
during his time here , the Senate will have sat 902 times , and he will be recorded as having been present only 790 times - a paltry attendance record of 87.6 per cent . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
how the ever - vigilant anti - Senate SWAT team has managed to miss Senator Doyle from its hit list is a mystery . 
it must be an oversight , particularly when one examines what he was up to while playing hooky . 
he was an active and conscientious member of the Joint Committee on Free Trade . 
he was an active and conscientious member of the Joint Committee on Canada ' s International Relations . 
he was an active and conscientious member of the Internal Economy Committee and chaired its Subcommittee on Budgets and Personnel . 
he was an active and conscientious member of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
he was an active and conscientious member of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
he was - but enough . 
the list of his non - chamber activities continues , but I fear that what already has been revealed is already enough to arouse our detractors . 
in any event , why should anyone be surprised at Dic Doyle ' s record when one recalls that he was named to the Senate by none other than former prime minister Brian Mulroney who , as we are repeatedly reminded , gleefully filled vacancies here with such party hacks and blind loyalists as Senators Beaudoin and Keon ? 
just look at his background . 
he then returned to the newspaper business and joined The Globe and Mail in 1951 , where he occupied many senior positions , including those of managing editor , editor , editor - in - chief , and Editor Emeritus . 
in 1983 , when he was made a member of the Order of Canada , the following citation was read : 
as managing editor and , since 1979 until recently , editor - in - chief of the Toronto Globe and Mail , Richard Doyle has been the guiding intelligence behind the development of the influential editorial policy and the national and international coverage of Canada ' s leading English - language newspaper . 
largely through his guidance , the paper has set high standards of writing and ethics in journalism . 
colleagues may be interested to know that since 1967 , 3,848 Canadians have been inducted into the order , and fewer than 100 are identified as journalists . 
by the way , of the 100 present members of this chamber , 10 are members of the Order of Canada . 
i thought I would throw that out as more grist for the mill of the Senate reformation movement . 
one of his close colleagues on The Globe and Mail describes Senator Doyle while at the newspaper as being renowned for a conservatism that was heavily coloured by compassion , a social conscience , a strong civil libertarian streak , and a catholic love of humanity . 
fortunately for us , these principles guided him here , too , to the benefit of both sides of the chamber . 
the Globe and Mail ' s founding goes back to George Brown who , to many , is the real father of Confederation . 
if you have been to Senator Doyle ' s office , you will have noticed that Brown is very prominent on its walls . 
senator Doyle makes no effort to hide his admiration for his distinguished predecessor , and mention of his name will inevitably lead to a learned discourse on his hero and regret at his not receiving the wide recognition that he deserves as a key architect of Confederation . 
in his book Hurly Burly , Senator Doyle quotes the then - editor of the Globe , John Willison , as believing that , 
brown would have been a better politician if he had not been a newspaperman and a better newspaperman if he had not been a politician . 
brown would certainly have been delighted to know that Senator Doyle was and is an excellent politician and newspaperman . 
in particular , we will miss his reminding us of our responsibilities as parliamentarians - the need to avoid excesses in our carrying them out and to avoid restraint in upholding them . 
Somerset Maugham once wrote of conscience as being the guardian of community rules . 
senator Doyle was the guardian of ours . 
senator Dic Doyle gave all of himself to this place , even when the last few years were not kind to him physically . 
while we will all miss him , we wish him many years of a well - deserved retirement as he looks forward to spending more time with his family , of whom he is so fond - his most charming wife , Flo , their two children Judith and Sean , and their granddaughter Kaelan . 
nearly four years old , Kaelan sat in Dic ' s chair last week and announced that she , too , would be a senator some day . 
if she does make it , we can only hope that she will learn and profit from her grandfather ' s attendance record . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Edmond Burke once said that there are three estates in Parliament , but that the fourth estate was more important than them all . 
when Senator Richard Doyle first joined the Senate in 1985 , he brought with him the gifted and inquiring mind of a critic and reformer , of an editor of rectitude and honesty . 
show business was never Senator Doyle ' s style . 
an Officer of the Order of Canada and a distinguished member of the Canadian News Hall of Fame , Senator Doyle always made conscience his guide . 
in this sense , the decision of the University of King ' s College in Halifax , as well as that of my own alma mater , St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish , Nova Scotia to grant Senator Doyle honorary doctorates of law were clearly most appropriate . 
honourable senators will agree , I am sure , that the Senate is a far better place because Richard Doyle has remained in heart and soul a member of the fourth estate and a deep believer in an educated public which serves as a juror over it . 
Bruce Hutchison once called the creation of a daily newspaper a daily miracle . 
starting as a copy editor in 1951 , he experienced the dynamic impact of George McCullogh ' s pioneering leadership at the helm of one of Canada ' s most important newspapers , even if , one remembers , it was founded originally by , as mentioned by Senator Lynch - Staunton , the brilliant George Brown , a Father of Confederation . 
for all you senators here today who may have forgotten , and something which Senator Lynch - Staunton did not mention , George Brown was a clear Grit to boot . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we will not hold that against him . 
senator Graham : 
senator Doyle went on to work with Howard Webster - 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
who was not a true Grit . 
senator Graham : - succeeding the great Oakley Dalgeish as editor . 
his advice to the fourth estate , of which he was such a distinguished member for so many years , was always the same . 
it was that news writers should never judge political issues in print . 
that was a job for commentators , he said . 
the educated public would vote as it pleased without editorial advice . 
one of the funniest and most insightful books of our contemporary history remains Hurly Burly , Senator Doyle ' s account of his time at the Globe . 
as an editor , Senator Doyle led the battle for a free press that would police itself . 
in a recent series of reflections published in The Globe and Mail on the coming millennium , Senator Doyle made the important point that watching , in the political sense , is one of the most useful services the citizens of this country can perform . 
he argued that ordinary citizens must engage in the process of reform , and must take the time to serve as watchdogs over our children and their right to be protected by governments . 
" perhaps " he said , " we should pledge ourselves to visit the Indian reserves closest to our homes to see for ourselves whether they are getting a fair share - and pass that information on to our governors . " 
however , at the depth of this distinguished critic , editor and reformer , so jealous of our rights and freedoms , as shown by the acute and insightful commentary we have been so privileged to hear in this chamber , lies a wonderful love for Canada and a passion for his country which comes from the heart of a distinguished RCAF veteran who flew with Bomber Command . 
Winston Churchill once said that the only guide to a man is his conscience : the only shield to his memory is the rectitude and sincerity of his action . 
in defending many of his old comrades in the RCAF , those airmen who opened the windows of freedom over Nazi - occupied Europe , he denounced the distortions of recent docu - dramas in this country which he felt spoke from narrow points of view , and were so often and so sadly mistaken for the real story . 
he wrote movingly that distortion and despair are no tribute to the 46,000 Canadians who died in World War II , 13,000 of them from the RCAF . 
he reminded us that per ardua ad astre or " through travail to the stars " is the motto of a proud and distinguished service in which over 5,000 Canadians won individual decorations for gallantry . 
on that issue , as on some others , he has enlightened this nation and this chamber . 
very few would know better than Richard Doyle the fundamental truth of Ben Bradlee ' s famous remark that news is the first rough draft of history . 
we really only have one chance to get it right , no matter to which estate we are called . 
senator Doyle , you have made a very significant contribution to the work of this place . 
i know that your mind and your pen will continue to be active in pursuing justice and truth . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , Senator Doyle ' s speeches in this place have elevated many a debate and enlivened many a dull day . 
his prose adorns the pages of Hansard , there to delight the future scholar who may come across those gems while ploughing through the more arid oratorical efforts of the rest of us . 
his prose also has a special place in my files . 
over a period of years Senator Doyle has sent me dozens of personal and private memoranda - pithy , pungent , irreverent , iconoclastic , not - quite - libellous commentaries on politics and certain politicians , on parliamentary perks , on his interpretation of sacred scriptures , on journalism and certain journalists , and on so much else . 
i am saving these memoranda for possible future publication and profit , a source of supplementary income if ever my financial situation becomes unbearable . 
needless to say , I will give first refusal on these documents to Senator Doyle himself . 
he will have motive and ample means to bid for these documents as he will soon be living high on the hog , not only on the lavish annuity bestowed on him by Lord Thomson of The Globe and Mail , but also on his " obscene " Senate pension . 
i like to think that the Senate has been quite an education for Senator Doyle . 
he came here thinking himself worldly - wise , without illusions , the hard - nosed newspaperman who had seen everything and tried most of it . 
a few months into his apprenticeship on the Internal Economy Committee with Senator Colin Kenny revealed Senator Doyle to be a terminal na ï f , an innocent abroad , a young man who still had a lot to learn . 
he turned for comfort and reassurance to Senator Lavoie - Roux , herself a veteran of Montreal and Quebec politics but she , too , had never seen anything like it . 
senator Doyle came here suspecting that power corrupts , and found only that it scandalizes . 
honourable senators , Senator Doyle ' s participation in the work of the Senate has been distinguished not only by his elegant and eloquent prose but by the quality and substance of his contribution . 
there has been wisdom and moderation but also a passion for fairness , justice and respect and , not surprisingly for one so revered in his profession , a passion for truth . 
he has been an asset to the Senate and , needless to say , to this political party . 
before bidding him au revoir , I wish to acknowledge the debt of my personal gratitude , deeply felt , for his many acts of kindness and consideration . 
i have been many times renewed , indeed revived , by his thoughtful encouragement and support , extended , as he must have known , when it was most needed . 
i know I am not alone in this chamber in my warm appreciation of his generous friendship . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , saying farewell to Senator Doyle today is very difficult for me , because it is no secret to anyone in this place that we are kindred souls . 
we have regularly expressed our admiration and affection for each other , and neither Mike nor Flo cares because they understand it perfectly . 
we share that special , almost mystical feeling that newspapers then , at least , were living , breathing creations with a heart , a soul and a conscience . 
we were privileged to be allowed to be part of them . 
senator Doyle has always believed that journalism must be about fact and truth , and not about speculation and rumour . 
honourable senators , there is a bit of an age difference between Senator Doyle and myself , but that is of no account . 
there is also that slight distinction that he has held every possible newspaper position , ending up at the height of power as the editor - in - chief of the mighty Globe and Mail in Toronto , while I was but a working stiff who , by several quirks of fate , ended up at a ridiculously early age writing about the awesome activities of this Hill from the Parliamentary Press Gallery . 
none of that matters . 
he teethed on the Chatham Daily News and I on The Lethbridge Herald . 
we learned a lot of very special things which transcend any consideration of age or titles . 
it was with great expectation that I learned he would be a senator about a year after I entered this place . 
i accepted with regret , of course , but no surprise , that he chose to sit as a Conservative . 
many were startled by this appointment . 
they wondered what allure this chamber could possibly offer after the incredible rush of life at the pinnacle of The Globe and Mail . 
i , however , knew exactly what Dic Doyle would do - he would work hard . 
he would do it with skill and accuracy , with eloquence and tenacity , with humour and with honour . 
no one could have anticipated also that in the face of a frightening illness he would be forced to work on with immense courage and great heart . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , we have shared duties . 
my personal favourite was on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
i treasure the memories of our cross - country tour with the late Senator Earl Hastings as we - perhaps naively - sought the grass - root views of inmates in federal penitentiaries on the merits of changes to the Parole Act . 
senator Doyle has been a loyal and constant supporter of the cause of literacy , which has become a major part of my life on and off Parliament Hill . 
i thank him profoundly for that . 
he has fought fiercely for the rights of victims of the tainted blood tragedy , as outlined in the Krever inquiry , and I congratulate him on that . 
altogether , honourable senators , Dic Doyle has been a truly fine senator , as he continues to be a truly fine journalist . 
he is an unabashed patriot for his country , a proud veteran , and a strong and persistent voice - Lord was he persistent during Question Periods - for his province of Ontario and the city of Toronto . 
senator Doyle is a very kind gentleman , and I cheerfully admit that I will always have a crush on him . 
i will miss him very much . 
to he and Flo , I wish happy years ahead ; full of music , writing and instructive sessions with his granddaughter Kaelan , who wants to be a senator just like him ! 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it has been my good fortune to have been the seat - mate of Senator Doyle . 
i am , however , not privy to the reason why he had the misfortune to have me at his right . 
perhaps it was penance for some unpublished deed . 
for some time now , Senator Doyle has been keeping on his desk copies of the wonderful mural inscriptions that adorn the Speaker ' s chambers . 
the following is a passage from Seneca : 
Nihil oridinatum est quod praecipitatur et properat - nothing is well ordered that is hasty and precipitate . 
perhaps this is the lesson he has been struggling to teach me . 
certainly by his thoughtful interventions in this place over the years , Senator Doyle has been attempting to teach us the wisdom of prudence and careful consideration . 
he has been a good teacher , and I wish to place on the record my deep appreciation for the many lessons he has taught us . 
his speeches were pregnant with good lessons , for he did not merely present to us information that we did not have , but , rather , he would remove , for those who listened , the blinkers of repression that often prevent us from knowing what we potentially already know . 
honourable senators , the art of the English language finds creative expression in the writings of this Officer of the Order of Canada who has presided over The Globe and Mail . 
this Editor Emeritus , like all editors , compiled , garbled or cooked up materials into literary shape . 
we have often been , as has been alluded to by others this afternoon , the recipient of his cryptic and not so cryptic notes , all of which underscore his mastery of literary art. 
in saluting my friend and seat - mate , I wish to turn to some lines from J . R . Smart ' s poem entitled The School Magazine Editor . 
the Editor sat in the Editor ' s chair ; 
paper and pen and ink were there ; 
( not in the chair : that wouldn ' t be fair 
on the Editor ' s case ! ) 
on the table round 
they lay ; and the Editor looked and frowned , 
and carking care , and black despairs 
seemed settled for good as the Editor ' s share ; 
on trousers and boots , pulled out by the roots , 
were crumpled - up masses of Editor ' s hair ! 
` now riddle me one and riddle me two ' 
( which meant what only the Editor knew ) , 
` by all that ' s blue , if ever anew ' 
Ere ever again I proof such a flat ; 
for nobody cares how the magazine fares , 
or what trouble the Editor anguishes through ! 
honourable senators , the readership of The Globe and Mail and the members of this chamber are fortunate that Senator Doyle cares deeply about his country and the system of governance wherein the practice of freedom has been kept aflame . 
to you , my friend , God ' s speed : 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I have had the privilege of knowing Senator Doyle longer than any of you . 
i worked for him back in 1956 , 42 years ago . 
he was my boss , one of the best I ever had , and as such always showed good judgment and a great sense of fairness . 
any of the faults that you have seen in me since then are not his . 
he did not teach me any of my bad habits . 
he was able to deal with the fractious lot that journalists are , to keep us in line , and to make sure that we did our duty without pushing the limits of fairness , of knowledge and of decency . 
it has been mentioned here that while he was editor of The Globe and Mail , it was rated as one of the 10 best newspapers in the world . 
he made it what it became . 
it is a newspaper that is quoted around the world - at least it was when he was there . 
he reproached me in his book for kissing his wife ' s hand . 
how could I help it ? 
she was - and is - so enchanting . 
she did not seem to mind . 
i have long admired him , and I still do . 
you are a great guy . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to rise to pay homage to someone who is universally respected for his integrity , his intellect and his common sense . 
senator Doyle has championed causes on behalf of Canadians which have not always been popular or had the full support in this chamber , even among his own colleagues , and those who have offended his sensitivities for fairness , justice and truth have felt the sting of his prose . 
for me , Senator Doyle has been a teacher and a friend , and I am richer for having known him . 
Dic , I pray that you and Flo enjoy a long and fruitful retirement in the midst of your loving family . 
we will all miss your wisdom and your wit . 
hon. Th é r è se Lavoie - Roux : 
honourable senators , I would like to pay tribute to our colleague Senator Richard Doyle on the occasion of his departure . 
honourable senators , when Senator Doyle was offered and accepted his appointment to the Senate in 1985 , he decided to sit on the PC side of the floor . 
the legend is that his sympathies for minorities prompted him to do so . 
his appointment was applauded by all . 
senator Doyle ' s reputation as one of Canada ' s foremost journalists held the promise of the new senator touching this institution with his wand of distinction . 
indeed , he has . 
as editor of The Globe and Mail , Senator Doyle was not politically active before he became a senator , but he certainly was politically powerful . 
when he came to the Senate in 1985 , he had to learn the ways of Beauchesne , but he was not a complete stranger to parliamentary procedure . 
this same concern for the public ' s right to know prompted him to persuade his Senate colleagues to open the doors of our Internal Economy Committee to the public at a time when the lack of transparency of the committee was being seriously questioned . 
it was at the time of our work together on the Internal Economy Committee that I first developed a true appreciation for Senator Doyle ' s many outstanding qualities . 
today , I wish to take the opportunity to thank him publicly for his wonderful and constant support , his wisdom and his total integrity . 
senator Doyle ' s strong sense of duty in wanting to support this institution and his colleagues is surpassed only by his sense of responsibility and duty to the taxpayers of our country . 
it has always been evident that he holds a very strong belief and deep concern that Canadian citizens must be our first and greatest concern as parliamentarians . 
senator Doyle ' s service to our country and its people has been outstanding . 
in the Second World War , he served in the Royal Canadian Armed Forces in Bomber Command , and retired in 1945 with the rank of Flying Officer . 
he has made literary contributions as author of two books of which many of you know ; The Royal Story and Hurly - Burly : 
a Time at the Globe , to which reference was made earlier . 
senator Doyle was also appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada in 1983 . 
his prominent career , most notably as editor - in - chief of The Globe and Mail certainly speaks to his service to the people . 
his talents as editor have also been of profit to the Senate . 
senator Doyle ' s facility with words and his strong capacity for analysis have undoubtedly distinguished him among the rest of us . 
we have had countless opportunities to hear Senator Doyle speak in the Senate , and to appreciate how he has both mastered the English language and given us an appreciation for its subtleties . 
i recall an incident when we were working on the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide . 
senator Doyle was not a member of that committee but he followed its work . 
during a discussion on assisted suicide , Dic slipped me a note on which was written a sentence that struck me with its depth of meaning . 
our concern was for the impact that legalized assisted suicide would have on the social conscience . 
the sentence , as I recall , read : 
is one form of suicide linked to another - at least by the bond of increased acceptance ? 
that was a sort warning against accepting assisted suicide because then this link would be too easily made . 
Dic ' s note captured the idea that the acceptance of assisted suicide threatens to reduce to triviality the notion of suicide . 
for your innumerable contributions , Dic , only a few of which I have touched upon today , I wish to thank you most warmly and wholeheartedly . 
you have so many talents . 
i am sure they will remain with you in your retirement years and continue to make a difference in the lives of those around you . 
your granddaughter Kaelan is most fortunate to be a beneficiary of her grandfather ' s wisdom and qualities . 
although I speak of retirement , I have more than a sneaking suspicion that we have not heard the last of Senator Doyle . 
i am certain that his watchdog habits and deep feelings for Canada will be ceaselessly monitoring political events . 
we welcome you to be in contact with us , particularly , if I might make the request , with respect to social issues . 
may you find more time to enjoy your extensive music collection , as well as more time to enjoy Flo , your family and your close friends . 
Dic , I want to assure you that for the years I will continue to serve in the Senate , I will always be faithful to the goals and principles we share in common . 
i will endeavour to hold high your banner of justice and fairness , and transparency in the eyes of the public . 
to have known you and worked with you has made my time in the Senate worthwhile . 
thank you for your friendship , your confidence , and your constant support , sometimes through difficult times . 
let me assure you that you have a good friend in Quebec and that you will always be welcome there . 
my wish for other colleagues is that they may have as positive and meaningful an experience as I did , in working with someone of your calibre . 
Dic , thank you for everything . 
i thank you for everything you have contributed to the Senate and to your fellow citizens for these many years . 
i wish you well . 
you will certainly be greatly missed , as many have said before . 
but , as the song says " We ' ll meet again . " 
we will be seeing each other soon . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I should like to say a few words about the remarkable contribution of Senator Doyle , as a member of the the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
i was appointed to the Senate in 1988 , nearly ten years ago . 
from the beginning , I was fascinated by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , of which I became a member . 
senator Doyle was already sitting on that committee . 
members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs must have a certain expertise in law , but it also includes people who have different training , like , for example , Senator Doyle . 
i shall say that the work of Senator Richard Doyle in the legal committee has been very regular and very exceptional . 
before coming to the Senate , our colleague was editor - in - chief at The Globe and Mail , a highly regarded daily that has been part of the history of Canada since the time of George Brown , whom both sides of the floor have praised this afternoon . 
a good editorial writer must have both good ideas and a knack for putting them down on paper . 
his speeches here have always been very interesting . 
among his honours , he was made a member of the Canadian News Hall of Fame in 1990 . 
senator Doyle is a man of great humour , of very sound judgment , d ' une logique impeccable , « une t ê te bien faite » , as we say in French , and much more , a philosopher ! 
we need people like him on every committee and in the Senate . 
if you ask me , Senator Doyle will be a hard man to replace . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , it appears that I am the only senator who hesitated and did not want to speak at this point about Senator Doyle . 
i did not want my words compared with his , as I understand he will get the last word . 
as I have spent many hours reading and rereading his speeches , I find that many others , particularly mine , pale in comparison . 
in this house , no one has had the ability with words and the sincerity to live by those words on a daily basis as has Senator Doyle . 
when I first came to the Senate , through the same nefarious route as apparently he did , as well as Senator Beaudoin and Senator Keon , I went to Senator Doyle on many occasions for advice , for comfort , for the occasional scolding , for the occasional dose of optimism . 
like Senator Fairbairn , a slight crush was developing on Senator Doyle . 
i thought that this was a unique experience for me , perhaps because of the route that I had taken . 
however , I was not here for very long before I learned that that kind of special relationship that Senator Doyle had with me was not so special . 
he kept it for all senators . 
there are many examples of good senators in this chamber . 
we have heard , as Senator Doyle would say , quite enough about Senator Doyle ' s success and his contributions to this chamber . 
i wish to underscore his position as a role model , as a friend and as an example to all of the senators here . 
the fact that he gave of his time to the rest of us not only exemplifies his own integrity and commitment to the Senate but , I think , through his various methods - his small notes , his humour , his questioning - he has made all of us better senators . 
i wish him well . 
i know that he will continue to be a friend to the Senate and a friend to the democratic process , however he sees it . 
i know he has spent many hours and many days pondering , not how politicians perhaps will see Canada but how individuals will see Canada . 
long after many of us retire , many people will continue to respect the Senate as they read and quote from the words of Senator Doyle . 
senator Doyle , I extend my best personal wishes , and I trust that most of us can live up to your example . 
hon. Richard J . Doyle : 
honourable senators , you have heard what I have heard . 
you have heard the evidence ; so I say to you : 
four more years ! 
at the same time , I wish to remind honourable senators that there are two sides to every story . 
you have heard one and now you will hear another . 
i asked to be dragged down the threadbare , crimson carpet by Duff Roblin , the government leader and the only Canadian I have ever known to wear the kilt and not look silly . 
to assist him , I picked Lowell Murray , who , years later , would lead a beleaguered Senate boldly and gracefully through the GST crisis . 
it was not my intention to spend more than one year , or two , exhausting the opportunities that the upper house had to offer to a wilted journalist ; wilted and wounded . 
someone - someone opposite , I am sure - had his jollies during my welcome by circulating a column I had written not long before at The Globe and Mail . 
it started out innocently enough with a mention of the fact that the editors of Playgirl magazine had been in Toronto , my hometown : 
... making it starkly evident that very little is left to chance in the choice of centrefolds . 
they advertised for specimens to appear in a photo layout on Canadian men . 
five hundred candidates appeared at the hiring hall at the appointed hour , stripped to the waist , did whatever they could with their pectorals and smiled for the camera . 
in good time , the 500 were picked over and an even dozen were chosen to pose in frontal altogether . 
it is a puzzle to me that in so many aspects of Canadian life the many aren ' t called before the few are chosen . 
even more puzzling is the fact that we accept such exclusivity of choice when we obviously have no lack of confidence in our capacity to compete for the worthwhile and fulfilling tasks that need doing . 
goodness knows , the editors of Playgirl could do a better job of choosing senators than we do in this country . 
the choosing here is the prerogative of the Prime Minister and nowhere does he indulge his whims with such abandon . 
only occasionally does he take anyone ' s advice on a Senate appointment . 
the last time Pierre Trudeau did , he deferred to the Premier of Ontario who gave the lollipop to his bagman . 
as far as the rest of us are concerned , we ' re not even sure the fellow has pectorals . 
only the whip of the day - that self - effacing friend of veterans , Orville Phillips - recognized the dangers I faced . 
he seated me between the two men in the Senate best equipped to handle divine interference with my freedom of speech . 
senator Phillips put Dr. Paul David on one side of me and Dr. " Staff " Barootes on the other . 
if the heart should explode , or the bladder splatter , I was sitting pretty . 
i used the time to learn something about bagmen other than what I had picked up on the street and in newspaper washrooms . 
jack Godfrey was never embarrassed by his party - activated acquisitiveness . 
nor was he bashful when it came to flailing outrageous absenteeism within his own party . 
guy Charbonneau , over here on our side , was one of the few champions we had in a long spell of political drought in Quebec . 
for me , his calm courage in the GST debate contributed mightily to our survival of the crisis . 
there are faults and weaknesses in the Senate , but the good men who come to the pecuniary aid of their parties are not the ones to be blamed . 
did I say " men " ? 
working with Nate Nurgitz and Derek Lewis on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , I rarely could fault the leadership of a woman , Joan Neiman , or the pizzazz of Anne Cools . 
to have served on the Rules Committee under Brenda Roberston was hard work - productive and valuable . 
she was a whole damned houseful of parliamentary furniture ! 
in the great recession , she saved the Senate millions of dollars without forcing the departure of a single employee of the Senate . 
any place in this farewell would be a good place to say something about Lowell Murray . 
how he managed to run this joint and serve as Brian Mulroney ' s point man on national unity and comfort our new Tory senators - many of whom seemed to be away from home for the first time - how he managed to do all of these things simultaneously still astonishes me . 
only one of his qualities - and I suppose most of us could forgive it - disgusts and infuriates . 
i am speaking , sadly of course , of his capacity to leap to his feet without notice , and speak for an hour without notes in baroque sentences that parse . 
my great friend Senator Barootes used to say that Lowell stood out because so many people around him spent their time trying to pick the fly poop out of the pepper . 
my wife goes further than that . 
just the other , day she described Murray as a fine - looking man - for 36 . 
there are many of Senator Murray ' s accomplishments to be noted , but none will stick in my mind longer than his remarks in the chamber the other day when he apologized to the country for the Senate ' s failure to act sooner in the Thompson affair . 
in comments I made here earlier this week , I quoted at length from speeches made by Senator John Lynch - Staunton . 
the quotations had to do with Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s central role in the Pearson affair . 
like Senators Lazarus Phillips and Grattan O ' Leary before him , he believes that the real function of the Senate is to see that the rights and the liberties of the individual are respected and protected . 
not long ago , I had spoken up in the Senate to register my admiration for another of our leaders . 
i am indeed a fan of Joyce Fairbairn . 
just the other day I remarked to my wife that Senator Fairbairn is a fine looking woman - for 32 ! 
should I confess now that there were occasions earlier on when , by agreement , Senator Fairbairn and I both ignored party lines to steer committees to the service of justice and the splendours of truth ? 
in this place , we should seek the truth and pray for justice . 
Brian Mulroney is the man who " brung " me to this house of opportunities . 
i persuade myself that , in the end , he will be freed of the efforts to dirty his name , and will be accepted as one of the great ones of Canadian history . 
i had hoped here today to more than just mention many others to whom I am indebted . 
Jim Balfour does not need to raise his voice , nor raise it often to be heard on both sides of this chamber . 
it has been an honour for me to sit in the same room as Wilbert Keon , whose contributions to Senate knowledge of the risks and dangers facing health care may turn the Senate into new avenues of advocacy . 
don Oliver makes me stop and think . 
my buddy Con Di Nino has made me argue until I am sure that I am right . 
bill Kelly and Trevor Eyton are my vicarious board rooms . 
g é rald Beaudoin is the university I never attended . 
Michael Meighen is the link with party heritage . 
Norman Atkins and I mourn the passing of the same lost causes . 
it has been a privilege to share this seating cluster with No ë l Kinsella and Eric Berntson , who have tried to educate me in the lore of the East and the West , while leaving my heart in Toronto where it belongs . 
Janis Johnson , Mira Spivak , Eileen Rossiter and Ethel Cochrane have kept me safely in line with social and cultural causes from the great outside , David Angus notwithstanding . 
my good friend Duncan Jessiman remains in the Senate until early summer . 
at that time , he will be unceremoniously kicked out like the rest of us . 
however , in that interval of time , I depend on him to take all my calls from the marijuana crowd . 
i leave with a confession for my whip - the party loyalist , Senator DeWare . 
it is time to tell you , Mabel , that Senator Gigant è s was my friend when I came here and remains my friend today ! 
what ' s more , I like Al Graham and I admire John Stewart . 
and I wish Senator Lorna Milne well in the difficult job of chairing the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , my favourite committee over the 13 years I have been in this place . 
Marjorie LeBreton and I , for some time now , have been publishing an underground newspaper . 
may it continue to flourish and to participate in the pure and certain rise of Jean Charest . 
when I first came to the Senate , committee clerk Paul B é lisle took me by the hand and explained that most things in the Senate on most days were not what they seemed to be . 
Paul , who began his career as a page in this place and is now Clerk of the Senate , Clerk of the Parliaments and Keeper of the Flame for this institution , is aided splendidly at the Table by Richard Greene , Blair Armitage , Gary O ' Brien , Heather Lank and Charles Robert . 
they , I can tell you , could finish the rest of us in a day if they chose to . 
lord help me if my shy assistant , Cheryll Hannaford , ever turned against me . 
i remember an incident that occurred a few years ago when a noon - hour kitchen fire forced all of us down the staircases and out into the precincts where it was trying hard to rain . 
senator David Walker , a lifer and a gentleman , not knowing what the day would bring , left the restaurant with a freshly filled glass in hand . 
out in the cold , he looked around at the bunches of people who were collectively the Senate and raised his wine glass in a gallant toast . 
" what a fine lot they are , " said he , and the lot of us agreed . 
as for me , I have special reasons to be grateful for the patience of the people who work here - inside the chamber and out . 
the peculiarities of radiation treatment have blessed me with a voice that is strained through pads of SOS pot cleaners and you , my friends , have been kind enough to sit through the consequences . 
at the proper time , Brenda and her committee - mates will announce the details . 
i must mention my old committee adversary , Senator Colin Kenny . 
i have been charged to do this . 
you see , my Grandmother Doyle , bless her soul , who was born here in the Valley , was a Kenny . 
a family tree surgeon tells me that Colin and I might be cousins . 
will my debts to Brian Mulroney never be paid ! 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
orders OF THE DAY 
leave having been given to proceed to Order No. 1 : 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Taylor , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill C - 4 , to amend the Canadian Wheat Board Act and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , on our side , we have concluded the analysis of Bill C - 4 at second reading and are therefore supportive of the bill proceeding to committee . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry . 
agriculture and Forestry 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
leave having be given to proceed to Motion No. 57 : 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson , pursuant to notice of February 25 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry have power to sit today at 3:30 p.m. , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
motion agreed to . 
[ earlier ] 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of a group of Russian aboriginal leaders , who are in Canada to participate in the institution Building for Northern Aboriginals of Russia Project , sponsored by the Inuit Circumpolar Conference , Canada . 
on behalf of all senators , I wish you welcome to our Senate chamber . 
the Honourable Stanley Haidasz , P . C . 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Stanley Haidasz was born the son of Polish immigrants who learned both our official languages in school and went on to eke out an ability to understand Slovak and Ukrainian . 
in the country of the blind , the one - eyed man is king . 
senator Haidasz set out to ensure that Canada was not to be the preserve of the one - eyed king . 
by his side was his lovely Polish - born wife , Natalie , with whom Stanley fell in love when he first saw her , and heard her singing that great Polish melody When Irish Eyes are Smiling . 
Natalie is in the gallery with their extended family today . 
together , they spent long hours working for a country where openness of minds and openness of hearts was as much a part of the social fabric as the air that we breathe . 
as a medical doctor and a general practitioner for working people , most of whom were from ethnic minorities , he understood the costs of discrimination and poverty , and the need to have a system of good health care available to all Canadians . 
shall we judge a country by the majority or by the minority ? 
" by the minority , surely , " said Ralph Waldo Emerson . 
as a member of Parliament , Stanley represented a tiny microcosm of the planet itself . 
he praised their loyalty and dedication to their new country , the virtues of sharing and service to others , commitments to family values , and hard work and education for the young and , most especially , commitment to the right to grow up equal . 
he emphasized the fact that minorities , in many ways , often hold the key to a better society , a better community , a better country . 
it is only through those who are unafraid to be different , it was once said , that advance comes to human society . 
appointed Canada ' s first Minister of State for Multiculturalism in 1972 , he fought for that right - for the right to be different . 
he understood that national unity was very much a question of strengthening and revitalizing the values highway that links Canadians from coast to coast . 
for Polish Canadians , most of whom immigrated here in several major waves throughout this century , this was particularly true . 
Poland is a country which suffered cruelly over the centuries from occupation and division , perhaps the cruellest being the Nazi occupation during World War II , and the devastating Soviet invasion from the east which occurred in the closing months of the war . 
many had lost everything . 
they came to Canada with hope and commitment . 
they brought with them a special genius for music and literature , and a rich historic culture . 
all sought a better life and new beginnings . 
they knew that freedom is not a gift bestowed but a reward hard won . 
in the dark hours of Communist rule in his mother country , Stanley kept hope alive . 
from the early years in which he was Parliamentary Secretary to Paul Martin Senior , he kept up Canadian - Polish contacts , whether as president of the Polish Millennium Fund , through Canadian - Polish medical exchanges , or through the fight to win rights for Polish airlines to charter flights from Poland to Canada . 
honourable senators will recall as well Senator Haidasz ' s attempts in the late 1980 s to get more Canadian aid for the Independent Trade Union government of Solidarity . 
today , we see a free Poland evolving from an unhappy past . 
one of the children of this new democracy is Aleksandra Brylant who came to Canada several years ago , at the age of two , for life - saving surgery . 
she was born with three holes in her heart , and was afflicted with Down ' s syndrome as well . 
while the Herbie Medical Fund for disadvantaged children covered most of the medical costs , Senator Haidasz was instrumental in bringing little Aleksandra here for a new lease on life , as he has done for so many others . 
we all share the great pride , Stanley , that you justifiably felt one week ago today when you were awarded , in Warsaw , the Order of Merit of Poland . 
Stanley , you kept the struggle alive in the darkest hours . 
little Aleksandra and the others you have helped will face a new millennium in a country where new hope stirs and , because of you , Canada is less a kingdom of the blind than most other places on the planet . 
your work has kept the one - eyed king in permanent exile . 
rather , it is a place to which little Aleksandra can return one day ; a place where openness of hearts and openness of minds will be as natural as the air that we breathe . 
senator Haidasz , you are truly a man of passion , principle and conviction . 
you have made an enormous contribution to this chamber . 
you will be missed . 
all honourable senators join in wishing you and Natalie good health and much happiness in your retirement . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , it is with pleasure that I rise in tribute to the Honourable Senator Stanley Haidasz . 
senator Haidasz has ably served Canada , particularly his constituents and his community , for four decades and then some , both as a Parliamentarian and as a fine medical practitioner . 
during all these years , he has been faithful to his constituents and to his beliefs . 
the residents of the Toronto area of Parkdale elected Senator Haidasz no less than six times . 
during his first two terms as a member of the other place , I spent my formative years , together with my family , in the Parkdale area . 
it was heavily populated by recent immigrants , mainly from Northern Europe , but sprinkled with the odd southerner - and " odd " is the key word there - like myself . 
my boyhood friends were principally of Polish , Ukrainian and Baltic backgrounds . 
during these particularly trying years , Senator Haidasz was a role model who made us believe in ourselves and inspired us to strive for our goals . 
as the first minister responsible for multiculturalism , he developed and articulated positions on issues that better reflected the make - up of Canada then - no easy task during a period when Canadians were still debating the virtues of biculturalism . 
honourable senators , I have been both a witness and a victim of those early days , when many of us were seen by too many of our neighbours as some strange and substandard race . 
it was leaders like Senator Haidasz who provided a ray of light and the ray of hope needed to go on . 
senator Haidasz , I express to you my congratulations and thanks , and I extend my best wishes for many more good years surrounded by the love of your family and friends . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , when I listen to tributes such as these given today , I sometimes think we should pay tribute halfway through the senator ' s career so that we may have a better understanding of the capacity of the individuals with whom we serve in this chamber . 
as someone who is interested in the whole field of multiculturalism , I knew of the contributions that Senator Haidasz made to this important and significant undertaking in this country . 
i experienced it firsthand several years ago , when Senator Haidasz came to Winnipeg , to the opening of a newly built church on the site of an old church , originally built in 1870 , of the Polish Catholic Community in the city of Winnipeg . 
the opening of the new church , far more elaborate than the older church had been - and very impressively decorated with a series of leaded windows depicting the stations of the cross - was a moment of very special and unique history in the city of Winnipeg . 
the special guest of the day was Senator Haidasz . 
i was amazed that every man , woman and child in that room knew Senator Haidasz ' name . 
they knew about his contribution to their community , nationwide . 
they knew that he had kept hope alive for so many of them in the dark days of communism in Poland . 
their admiration , their affection and their outright love for this man was very eloquently expressed - orally by some , and just by the looks of admiration that they gave him as they passed by in both awe and gratitude for the fact that this man was in their midst . 
honourable senators , the Polish community of Canada is indeed grateful for the eloquence with which he has represented their cause . 
i will end my tribute on a humourous note . 
the other night , at a party in honour of Senator Haidasz , he told us a bit of his history that I did not know . 
apparently in his early youth , he had spent a year in the noviciate . 
as you know , in service of the church , one must take three vows , namely , the vows of obedience , poverty and chastity . 
somewhat to my surprise , Senator Losier - Cool said that she had no difficulty with the vows of obedience and poverty , but had real problems with the vow of chastity . 
she wanted to know which problem Senator Haidasz had with membership in the noviciate . 
senator Haidasz smiled and said , " I had problems with all three ! " 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , I , too rise to pay tribute to our honourable colleague Stanley Haidasz . 
his departure from this chamber will mark the end of a rich and illustrious career as a parliamentarian and , more particularly , as a humanitarian . 
when our honourable friend was first chosen by the constituents of Trinity , and later Parkdale , Toronto , to represent them in the House of Commons in 1957 , his elected power , his tireless efforts and his genuine concerns went toward Canada ' s most vulnerable : newly arrived immigrants and refugees , war orphans , prisoners in Nazi concentration camps and labour camps , displaced persons , the elderly and the disenfranchised . 
indeed , his firm commitment to the disadvantaged , as well as his continuous efforts to reinforce Polish Canadian relations , must have been fuelled by the same fire that led him to establish a long respectable practice as a family physician . 
this was later followed by qualifying in cardiology at Chicago ' s Cook County School of Medicine and geriatrics at the University of Saskatchewan . Indeed , our honourable friend ' s medical devotion and contribution is something of great pride for all of us , myself included , in the medical profession . 
Dr. Haidasz ran his own medical practice in Toronto for the last 40 years and was , until last May , operating a week - end practice and making house calls to his older patients . 
needless to say , Senator Haidasz ' endeavours in consolidating his political and medical career for the betterment of Canadians , Eastern Europeans , and all of human kind , are numerous and outstanding . 
as a parliamentarian , both in the House of Commons and , since 1978 , in the Senate of Canada , he has been an avid defender of rights overlooked . 
he has been a consistent force towards establishing a market - place for affordable pharmaceuticals , and was the pioneer in facilitating the import of generic pharmaceutical products to less advantaged patients in Poland and other countries . 
in 1978 , Dr. Haidasz represented our country as a senator at the First International Meeting of Primary Health Care at Alma - Ata in the then U.S.S.R. , and in the same year established a Canada - Poland medical exchange program . 
honourable senators , our colleague has proven himself to be a staunch defender of access to medicine as a basic human right . 
in initiating several bills , he has sought to safeguard motherhood and the sanctity of human life . 
as a delegate to Bucharest for the first UN International Conference on Population , in 1974 , he has endorsed the rudimentary right to life and brought forth the necessity for primary health care development and an end to exploitation of women by misinformation , mutilation , forced sterilization , and abortion . 
forty - five years as a physician and politician , stalwart fighter for preventive medicine , the honourable senator has waged , for the last 40 years , an uphill war on tobacco . 
with Bill S - 71 , the Tobacco Act , Senator Haidasz emphasized the role of government to directly regulate nicotine content , carcinogens and other toxic subjects . 
in addition , he strongly advocated tax incentives for cigarette users to use off - nicotine therapies . 
today , with Bill S - 8 before the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , Senator Haidasz ' s combat against the abuse of tobacco products is as vigorous as ever . 
with this initiative , he and many others , such as myself , are anxious to see the reduction in the use of harmful additives contained in the product , coupled with a clear display of nicotine and tar content . 
as stated before , the battle against tobacco is one in which physicians have been on the front lines for a very long time . 
honourable senators , with these remarks , I stand here before you in recognition of Senator Haidasz , whose countless and tireless contributions to this chamber , to the Polish and Canadian community , to the medical profession and to the plight against tobacco , among many other things , are permanent marks of the wisdom and expertise we have been so fortunate to have encountered . 
indeed , his presence in this chamber will be greatly missed and we all wish him the very best . 
hon. Richard J . Stanbury : 
honourable senators , I would like to add a few words of tribute to those expressed to my long - time friend Stan Haidasz . 
i do not wish to repeat what has been said by others , because the fact that he has had such a remarkable career , I think , is obvious to anyone who has ever read any of his biographies , which are tremendously impressive . 
Stan Haidasz is a scholar , a beloved physician , a respected politician , a community leader , an international diplomat , a wonderful senator , and a gentleman loved by all . 
my own recollection of my relationship with Senator Haidasz goes back to the election of 1957 , when he resisted the first Diefenbaker election success by being elected in Trinity . 
unfortunately , no one in the Toronto area survived the second Diefenbaker sweep . 
senator Grafstein : 
but wait ! 
that is not the whole story ! 
senator Stanbury : 
it was not until 1962 that Senator Haidasz had the opportunity to run again . 
by that time , I had the responsibility for the Toronto area and Dr. Haidasz was one of the leaders of the Pearson sweep , which brought 14 of the 17 Toronto ridings into the Liberal fold . 
that was the election that converted Toronto from Tory Toronto to Liberal Toronto and , may I say , we have never looked back . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
senator Stanbury : 
i will not attempt to quote the unending list of positions , public and private , which Stan has occupied , nor the many honours that he has received . 
those have already been mentioned substantially . 
all I can say is that whenever , as an elected officer of the Liberal Party at the Toronto and district level , the provincial level or the federal level , I needed support from our members of the House of Commons , which was very often , I always knew I would get enthusiastic help from Stan. 
again , when I was assisting in the Canada Business Council and the Canada - Eastern Europe Trade Council to expand Canadian exports , Senator Haidasz , who knows that part of the world so well , was of tremendous help . 
i want particularly to mention Stan ' s family and their importance to him . 
Natalie , his bride of 48 years , has always been a charming presence in Stan ' s public career , but I know her importance to him is so much greater in their private life . 
i also know how deep is Stan ' s devotion to the members of his family . 
my wife , Marg , has asked me to include her in my tribute to Stan and Natalie , and I do so happily . 
our very warm personal wishes to Senator Haidasz and to his entire family . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I join my colleagues in this farewell tribute to Senator Haidasz . 
i was deeply touched by Dr. Keon ' s remarks and , as he spoke about Dr. Haidasz , I was reminded that Dr. Bonnell has only recently left this chamber . 
with Senator Haidasz ' s departure , we will be left with only one Doctor - Senator , Wilbert Keon . 
senator Haidasz ' s achievements and contributions are numerous . 
he has been an enormous credit to his family , to his race , to his community , to his province and to his country ; this country , Canada . 
he is a good man , a kind man , and a noble man . 
senator Haidasz ' s devotion to his church , the Roman Catholic Church , is well known . 
his defence of the unborn and the sanctity of life is notable and equally well known . 
senator Haidasz ' s force of conviction is to be admired by all of us . 
he was also Canada ' s first minister of multiculturalism . 
honourable senators , I am honoured to have known Senator Haidasz and to have worked with him . 
it may be said that Senator Haidasz did much for many people . 
senator Haidasz , as physician healer , as politician minister , as a senator , as a Knight of Malta , has truly spent his life in public service . 
it may be said that he served God , Queen , and country . 
i wish him and his family , his loved ones , in particular his daughter , whom I know well , God speed and good luck . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I want to add my wishes for Senator Haidasz in his retirement and his future endeavours . 
i have not been fortunate enough to sit on any Senate committees with Senator Haidasz . 
my knowledge of and my involvement with the work of Senator Haidasz is in the communities across Canada . 
as I come from one of the Slavic communities , I am well aware of the balancing act between trying to encourage people who have come to this country to participate in the daily life and daily issues of Canada , and the difficulty of maintaining a continued commitment to see change in the country from where you have come . 
it is often said in the Slavic community that you have to know from whence you came to know where you are going . 
we have often said that it is difficult to know our roots because we were precluded in many cases from going to the countries from which our ancestors came , or from which we came . 
we therefore looked to role models and people within the community who could excel and achieve in Canada , and continue to work through the Canadian government to effect the changes in the countries of our origin . 
senator Haidasz is often referred to as a role model of what Canada allows its people to achieve , and how it allows Canadians to continue to contribute to the values and to the issues that are important to us and to those of us who fight for the issues in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
i am very pleased that Senator Haidasz has had the opportunity to culminate a unique and very rewarding career as a professional , as a community leader , and now as a senator . 
as a role model , as a spokesperson , and as a Canadian citizen , he has contributed to Poland and other Slavic countries as an activist and as example . 
i wish you and your family well in your future endeavours . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , Senator Haidasz comes from a long tradition of the doctor - philosopher , and statesman , and leader . 
they existed everywhere , but were more noticed in corridor countries such as his country of origin , where every monstrous invasion would go through , and in other countries in Europe , and elsewhere , where the physician , not asking for money , would tend wounds , help people , bring children into the world , and try to understand and explain why fate was so unkind at the time . 
he is one of them , as was Senator Johnson ' s father , and as is Senator Keon . 
there is something else for which I would thank him . 
because of who he is and what he has been , older Canadians who were here before us more recent immigrants have been conditioned by people like him to think well of immigrants . 
i was welcomed in this country mainly because Senator Haidasz and people like him taught the people who then lived in this country that we , the immigrants , could love the country and serve it . 
thank you , sir . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I should like to add words of tribute to Stanley Haidasz . 
i first met him in 1961 in his riding in the heart of Toronto , which was really a Central European enclave . 
as President of the Young Liberals at that time , I organized the Young Liberal organization in his riding . 
it was in that process that I came to know him , his riding organization and members of his family . 
shortly thereafter , the Toronto and District Liberal Association established what we called the ethnic committee , which was really a multicultural committee , to focus on multicultural issues . 
i think that was the first time within the bosom of a national party that a microcosm organization of this type was established . 
the thrust of that organization really came from Stanley ' s riding and from Senator Haidasz himself . 
it is interesting how ideas filter up from a riding association , from the grass roots to the senior echelons , and finally become part of the fabric of the country . 
it was from those early days and that experience of various groups working in a concerted area , from various ethnic and multicultural groups led by Senator Haidasz and his colleagues , that those ideas ultimately filtered up into the federal government , and then into national policy . 
senator Haidasz was a pioneer at the grass - roots level , and one of the originators of our multicultural policy . 
in that sense , when we talk about the bilingual and multicultural essence of the country , Senator Haidasz is one of the leaders in that formulation . 
we also shared another interest . 
he and I have deep but different roots in Poland . 
we share a common hero , Jozef Pilsudski , who was the first leader after the First World War in Europe , and at that time in Poland , who believed in the idea of European federalism . 
therefore from time to time , Stanley and I have talked about our interests in the culture , the history , if not the different pasts that we share with respect to Poland , and in that sense I shall miss him . 
to you , Stanley , I say you are a great gentleman , a great scholar , a man of strong principles and stronger beliefs , and you will be sorely missed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , before talking about my good friend Senator Haidasz , whom I know better , I did not want to take part in the tributes to Senator Doyle , to keep our proceedings as short as possible . 
however , I want to tell Senator Doyle that I appreciate having known him . 
only yesterday , when he replied to me , I realized I was having a hard time keeping up with his wit . 
only this morning , after reading the transcript , did I realize all he had said yesterday in reply to my questions . 
he understood my point very well regarding the issue of independent senators . 
i wish him a nice time with his family . 
if he would be kind enough to help me out before his departure , he could give me the list of the senators in his party who are considering joining the independents . 
i would be more than happy to explain to them the difficulties they may encounter . 
senator Haidasz , I wish you the best of retirement . 
i know you will enlighten us by continuing with your writing . 
i will shock some Liberals by saying I favour The Globe and Mail by a mile over The Toronto Star . 
i do not want to start a debate , but I have always , like my father , read The Globe and Mail , and I find that I usually disagree with The Toronto Star . 
having said that , I want to pay tribute to a man I know better . 
i do not want to say more about him than the rest of you , but when I came into the House of Commons in 1964 , Senator Haidasz was already a Member of Parliament . 
i did not come in at a general election where everybody is on an equal footing . 
everybody wanted me to win that by - election and they knew that a young Liberal , especially me , could be elected during these times . 
everybody was very kind during my campaign - not before my nomination , but once I won the nomination - but I was on my own as soon as I arrived in Ottawa . 
such is life . 
however , Senator Haidasz came to me and said , " Vous ê tes du Qu é bec . " 
i was surprised , having participated in many debates across Canada , to hear him welcoming me in a very slow , beautiful , charming French , " Vous ê tes le nouveau d é put é . 
Je vous souhaite la bienvenue , " and it always struck me that the man was a real gentleman . 
i know he ran in 1957 and was elected . 
unfortunately , he had to go back home in 1958 when there was a big Conservative sweep , but he did not give up easily , and that is an example to people . 
he fought and came back in 1962 , if I am correct , and then on into 1963 and 1965 . 
someday , you will have to write about this . 
we were sure to go to election in 1978 . 
many people were appointed , and many by - elections took place because we did not call an election , and Senator Haidasz ' s riding was lost . 
i learned a lot from him . 
i learned that if you are a profoundly religious person , you should not hide it . 
if you believe in God , if you are attached to a faith , whatever that faith , you should be a messenger among people . 
senator Haidasz has done that in his own way . 
he has always been that kind of light . 
senator Haidasz is a light in the dark who never hesitates to show his deep attachment to his religion . 
we know he is a devout , well - known and honoured Catholic , who never campaigned across the country to defend one faith or another , but who affirms , in his own way , his affiliation with the Roman Catholic church . 
i thank him for that . 
he is an example to those who have problems affirming their faith . 
i would like to say to you , Dr. Haidasz , that I profoundly believe in your bill which was studied in committee this morning . 
you knew my father . 
he was a doctor , and he delivered 9,000 babies . 
that has nothing to do with the debate on abortion . 
we should protect people . 
they should not be forced to commit acts that they would not otherwise be doing unless they were asked to do it . 
you can leave and rest , come back anytime , and be well received by us . 
however , other senators will continue the work you have started . 
i wish you the very best . 
i thank you for the way you received me in the House of Commons on February 18 , 1964 . 
you made me feel welcome after I was introduced by Mr. Pearson to the new chamber . 
everyone was wondering about the new member . 
please , come back and see us . 
my office is yours at any time . 
hon. Stanley Haidasz : 
honourable senators , I am deeply touched this afternoon by the many words of tribute , praise , encouragement for the future , and your best wishes . 
i am deeply thankful for these wishes . 
as I leave this very beautiful chamber and this building where I have spent almost 40 years , more than half of my life , it is with great gratitude not only to providence but also to many people , people like my teachers at the University of Ottawa and other schools who inspired me to enter the life of politics , people who helped me once I got here , people like you in this chamber , my colleagues to whom I am very grateful for all their support and good example . 
mention was made by Senator Carstairs of my year as a noviciate . 
during that time , as well as my time at St. Joseph Scholastica in east Ottawa , we , who belong to the Congregation of Missionary Oblates , lived a community life , and our first commandment was to love our neighbour . 
i remember living in a big community of 300 to 400 students , and we were encouraged to get down on our knees and confess our offences or sins against our neighbour . 
i am very grateful also to people like Prime Minister Trudeau who appointed me to this chamber . 
as many senators have indicated , I came here first as a St. Laurent Liberal in 1957 , as a novice , a stranger almost , not to Ottawa , but to this building . 
i had only visited this building once when I was a student at the University of Ottawa , one evening , in the company of my classmate Jacques Rinfret , whose father was the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , Thibaudeau Rinfret . 
it was dark here because there was nothing going on in the evening . 
however , there was something going on in the other place . 
after the debate in the other place , my friend brought me to meet the first senator I saw in my life , Thomas Vien of Montreal , who sat as the Speaker in that Chair from 1943 to 1945 . 
that was my first and only visit to this chamber . 
i never dreamt of politics when I was a student in university or in the seminary . 
i had other ideas and other duties . 
however , I do not regret that somehow or other I was steered into politics . 
it was a great opportunity for me to get to know my country better from coast to coast to coast . 
i visited Newfoundland several times , Signal Hill , for example . 
every Canadian should have the privilege of visiting Signal Hill and watching the waves of the Atlantic hit those cliffs . 
during one visit to Newfoundland , when I was the main speaker at the unveiling of a statue of the first Methodist minister in that province , Joey Smallwood came along , at the end of the ceremony , and spoke for an hour , off the cuff , about the early missionaries and the religious customs and fights in Newfoundland . 
it was a great education . 
i am grateful to those who brought me into politics because , as I said , I got to know my country and its people and how the country is run . 
i wanted to do something . 
i actually entered politics , being talked into it , because of the then MP for Trinity , Mr. Don Carrick , who gained his seat in a by - election . 
c . D . Howe had promised him he would be the justice minister . 
don Carrick ran in a by - election because the previous member of Trinity , Lionel Conacher , Canada ' s greatest athlete , played softball on the front lawn with the press and tried to stretch a triple into a home run . 
turning around third base he fell and died of a coronary , so never try to stretch a triple into a home run . 
it was a great honour for me to represent Trinity at least for one Parliament . 
i did not return until 1962 . 
unfortunately , in 1962 I defeated one of my best friends , Arthur Maloney , a great criminal lawyer and a friend of Senator Atkins . 
he was a great friend of mine , and I was most embarrassed when I defeated him . 
i was embarrassed because he was a classmate of mine at St. Michael ' s . 
i was also friends with his future wife . 
nonetheless , these things happen . 
i only recall these things at this time to tell you how much I appreciate the life of politics . 
i see in the gallery one of my former secretaries , Kay O ' Meara , who was my secretary for almost 17 years . 
i only had three secretaries . 
she was the second one . 
she is here today , along with my wife and family , to whom I pay my respects for their support . 
as a physician I tried to be helpful in that field and bring in some new ideas . 
i really entered politics to bring in medicare . 
i was pushing my minister , Judy LaMarsh . 
i was her parliamentary secretary . 
then there was Allan J . MacEachen , the father of medicare . 
i am very proud that my party brought in the Hospital Insurance Diagnostic Act , then medicare , the Canada Pension Plan , the improvements to family allowances , and many other pieces of legislation . 
however , I think the most worthy and helpful to Canada was the enlightened policy on multiculturalism announced by Mr. Trudeau on October 8 , 1972 . 
after the election of 1972 , he asked me to be its first minister and to implement the program of multiculturalism , which I did my best to do . 
i also wish to pay tribute to the other ministers who followed me . 
many were from the party opposite . 
actually , the Conservative Party brought in the Ministry of Multiculturalism . 
i believe that was the most enlightened social policy of any Government of Canada . 
it was a privilege for me to take part in the work leading up to these policies , and I want to thank everyone who sat with me on committees or on caucus task forces to bring in legislation that would help to make Canada a better country in which to live . 
i am leaving about a year and a half before the third millennium , at a time when Canadians have their own crisis , worries and anxieties . 
i am talking about the spectre of another referendum and the so - called sovereigntist movement in the province of Quebec , where I lived for four years among French Canadians . 
i came to know them well and to love them . 
i am sorry to see that they are unhappy . 
i truly hope you are successful in your endeavours to keep Canada strong and united , to keep the people of Canada happy , and to provide that to which our young generations aspire or look forward to - a better future for everyone in this country . 
Adieu and dovidzenia . 
thank you for your assistance and counsel . 
i will be back again , not to criticize you , but to help you in any way I can . 
i love Ottawa . 
i have spent so much time here that I will not be able to stay away . 
bear with me if you see me again . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the New Civil Code of Quebec 
clause 35 
hon. Jacques H é bert : 
honourable senators , I would like to draw the attention of this house to a legal case that has been in the news here for a year and a half . 
the proceeding is calling into question two basic democratic principles : freedom of expression and the public ' s right to information . 
a writer and renowned historian , Pierre Turgeon , twice a winner of the Governor General ' s award , may well have one of his books , which was to be released in the spring of 1996 , banned and destroyed . 
i would note in passing that this information on Mr. Desrosiers may be found in the biography of Maurice Duplessis published by Conrad Black over 20 years ago . 
who then is seeking a permanent injunction against Mr. Turgeon ' s book in Montreal Superior Court ? 
Pierre Michaud , the great - nephew of Paul - Herv é Desrosiers , who died in 1969 , and the president of R é no - D é p ô t , a huge hardware firm with annual sales of half a billion dollars . 
r é no - D é p ô t grew out of Val - Royal , a firm founded by P . H . Desrosiers , the great - uncle of Pierre Michaud and a friend of Maurice Duplessis . 
millionaire Pierre Michaud is quoted in the Gazette of December 13 , 1996 as saying : 
we are talking about political bribery . 
but why talk about it in a book ? 
my employees are going to read that and say : 
holy jumping ! 
he was a bloody thief . 
he paid out money to buy contracts . 
that is not the image I want to present . 
that is how Mr. Michaud put it in his delicate way . 
what is Pierre Michaud ' s basis for demanding that a book that took one of Canada ' s most renowned authors three years to write be banned ? 
according to a research and a publishing contract , the details of which I will not get into , Pierre Turgeon never gave Pierre Michaud any right to edit the book ' s contents , nor did he ever transfer to him his inalienable copyright under the federal copyright legislation . 
realizing how weak its contractual arguments were , R é no - D é p ô t decided to invoke clause 35 of the new Quebec Civil Code , which states that the privacy of a deceased person cannot be breached . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , but I have to interrupt . 
is this matter currently before the courts ? 
according to our rules , matters currently in dispute before a court should not be raised in this House . 
in this respect , let me quote Citation 505 of Beauchesne , which states : 
members are expected to refrain from discussing matters that are before the courts or tribunals which are courts of record . 
the purpose of this sub judice convention is to protect the parties in a case awaiting or undergoing trial and persons who stand to be affected by the outcome of a judicial inquiry . 
it is a voluntary restraint imposed by the House upon itself in the interest of justice and fair play . 
therefore , if this matter is currently before the courts and has not yet been decided , I believe , Senator H é bert , that we cannot hear your statement . 
if that is the case , I would ask you not to continue . 
senator H é bert : 
it is quite possible that the case is before the courts ; it has dragged on for three and a half years . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i would think we could debate a piece of legislation , but not with specific reference to a case before the courts . 
senator H é bert : 
if you had stopped me earlier , the case would not have come up . 
now it has . 
what I wish to say is that my purpose was not to speak about the case , but about clause 35 , which , in my view , is extremely dangerous . 
i merely wanted my colleagues to know that it is clause 35 of the new Civil Code , which does not mention Mr. Desrosiers . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
very well . 
senator H é bert : 
so then , of all the ridiculous pieces of legislation I have ever seen in my life , clause 35 takes the cake . 
if clause 35 is enforced , it makes it impossible for the story ever to be written . 
i would like to tell you about the life of Jacques Cartier . 
it could be interesting , but wait , I must look up all his descendants to find out whether they will let me . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry but I must interrupt you again because your three minutes are up . 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
No. 
senator H é bert : 
we understand why you say no . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i will raise a point of order at the first opportunity . 
national Unity 
the Honourable Lucien Bouchard - Politics in Quebec 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , on February 8 , 1994 , I drew the attention of the Senate to the question of nationalism ; on March 22 , 1994 , to the question of nationalism and democracy ; and then on June 8 , 1994 , to the contradictions of Quebec nationalism . 
regrettably , contradictions continue to abound . 
last week , Premier Bouchard demanded from Quebec City that the federal government , federal ministers or federal members of Parliament , even from the Province of Quebec , should not participate in Quebec provincial elections or Quebec political issues . 
Sternly , he issued a warning of dire consequences if federal politicians even so much as intervened in Quebec provincial politics . 
yet when Mr. Bouchard was a federal appointee , federal member , federal minister of the Crown , federal Leader of the Opposition , and the leader of the Bloc here in Ottawa , he intervened freely and openly in Quebec politics every day - first , from his perch overseas and then from his perch here in Ottawa . 
last week , his federal colleagues in the Bloc raced from Ottawa to attend on every provincial legislature across Canada , and federal Bloc members continue to intervene in Quebec provincial politics daily . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Grafstein is referring to a case that is before the Supreme Court . 
it has not been decided yet . 
senator Grafstein : 
i will not deal with subject - matter , as I will deal with his comments . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
you may refer to the premier and to any actions that you do not agree with , but not with reference to a court case that is not settled . 
senator Grafstein : 
let me go on to say that Mr. Bouchard uses his sculptured thesis of democracy to support a unilateral declaration of secession , without understanding or recognizing that the very essence of democracy means equal treatment under the rule of law . 
according to his thesis , equal treatment is not applicable . 
democracy can only be employed in his own way and for his purposes but not for others . 
also two weeks ago , Mr. Bouchard claimed that the federal government is acting beyond its powers in its reference to the court and refused to participate in that trial . 
last week , he claimed that the very trial before the Supreme Court of Canada which he refused to recognize was a mistrial . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am sorry to interrupt the honourable senator , but his three minutes has expired . 
is leave granted for the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Grafstein : 
they were sent to seek from the Parliament of Canada an amendment to the Constitution on the Quebec school question , that very same 1982 Constitution . 
honourable senators , it seems to me that if Mr. Bouchard can only persuade the population of the province of Quebec by contradiction , surely that in itself is a contradiction of democracy . 
yet the contradictions continue . 
stay tuned . 
the Late W . O . Mitchell , P . C . 
tribute 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I know the hour is getting late , but I could not let today pass without paying a very brief tribute to W . O . Mitchell , an author from the west . 
he certainly opened my eyes and ears to the Prairie provinces when I first met him and was given a copy of his book , Who Has Seen the Wind . 
following that reading , I read Jake and the Kid , and all the other books with which this beloved author of Western Canada endowed the people of Canada . 
what is less known about W . O . Mitchell is the fact that he was an orchid grower . 
i was also privileged to have been in his home in the Rideau Park area of Calgary , in particular , his greenhouse where I saw the magnificent orchids he grew . 
honourable senators , if you wish to have a somewhat better understanding of Western Canada and Western Canadians , do yourself a favour and read Who Has Seen the Wind . 
the Senate 
privileges of Senators 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , on this occasion as two colleagues are leaving us who were great defenders , each in his own way , of civil liberties and democratic principles , and great exemplars of the highest patriotism , again each in his own way , who served within an institution , one of the roles of which is to defend the right to free expression , I could relate one incident connected with Senator Haidasz . 
one day , he rose to introduce a bill that no one would support . 
he could find absolutely no sponsor for that bill . 
in the name of freedom of expression , that hallowed basis of democracy , I rose to second his bill . 
otherwise , he would never have been able to bring the question of concern to him before us . 
and that was his absolute right . 
today , the lines are getting blurred between the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and that of the two Houses of Parliament . 
certain incidents have been raised , by Senator Cools among others . 
we , however , question such behaviour . 
i believe that a senator ' s freedom of speech in bringing a matter to our attention ought to be respected , absolutely . 
citation 505 in Beauchesne refers , not to a strict rule , but rather to a voluntary restraint imposed by the House of Commons upon itself . 
in my opinion , this is such an important matter that we ought to ask the Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders to examine application of Citation 505 with respect to our absolute right to express ourselves within these precincts on any question concerning the democratic interests of Canadians . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
scrutiny of Regulations 
second Report of Standing Joint Committee Tabled 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Joint Committee for the Scrutiny of Regulations on sections 56 and 57 of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Regulations . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Hervieux - Payette , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
thirteenth Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , February 26 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
thirteenth REPORT 
your committee has examined and approved the supplementary budget presented to it by the Standing Committees on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources for the proposed expenditures of the said Committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 : 
professional and Special Services $ 3,570 
all Other Expenditures 18,285 
total $ 22,285 
respectfully submitted , 
WILLIAM ROMPKEY 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on the motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
first Reading 
hon. Colin Kenny presented Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsibility Foundation . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Kenny , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for seconding at the next sitting of the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 10 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Ethel Cochrane , regarding the Young Offenders Act ; I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 12 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Leonard Gustafson , regarding the Wheat Board ; and I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 18 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Mira Spivak , regarding the cancellation of research study on seniors with osteoporosis . 
justice 
young Offenders Act - Request for Changes by Province of Saskatchewan - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Ethel Cochrane on February 10 , 1998 ) 
at the December meeting of the federal - provincial - territorial ministers responsible for justice , the provinces of Alberta , Manitoba , Ontario and Prince Edward Island tabled a number of amendments to the Young Offenders Act . 
they proposed lowering the age of criminal accountability in selected cases to address serious offences committed by children under the age of 12 years and for those exhibiting a pattern of offending . 
other proposals include providing for easier transfer to adult court to address serious and chronic offending ; for post - conviction publication of the identity of serious violent and chronic offenders ; for greater judicial discretion with respect to the admissibility of statement evidence and for the restriction of court appointed counsel to circumstances where youths or their guardians cannot afford to pay for legal services . 
the Communiqu é from the 1997 Premiers Conference states that " the Premiers , with the exception of the Premier of Quebec , agreed that the federal government should move expeditiously to introduce meaningful amendments to the Young Offenders Act to combat youth crime , protect communities and restore public confidence in the youth justice system . 
premiers also agreed that the federal , provincial and territorial governments should cooperate to improve preventative and rehabilitative programs for young offenders . " 
in 1995 , representatives from federal , provincial , and territorial governments formed a Task Force on Youth Justice and worked cooperatively to propose changes to the system . 
there is general agreement for alternatives to incarceration and a range of specific measures that would improve the administration of the Act . 
all these recommendations , as well as those put forward by the Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights , are being carefully considered by the Minister of Justice as she prepares to launch the Government ' s proposed strategy on youth justice . 
cooperative federal - provincial approaches are essential in order to protect society and meet our common commitments to children and youth . 
agriculture 
wheat Board - Amount of Unpaid Balance Owing - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Leonard J . Gustafson on February 12 , 1998 ) 
the CWB currently has an outstanding balance of approximately $ 6.6 billion in credit grain sales under the Credit Grain Sales Program ( CGSP ) . 
all countries with the exception of Iraq are current on their repayments . 
where grain is sold under the Credit Grain Sales Program , the full value of each sale is guaranteed by the federal government and credited to that year ' s pool account . 
were there to be any losses they would be assumed by the federal government and therefore there would be no losses to producers . 
in cases where the Government of Canada has agreed to reduce a country ' s debt for reasons of government policy , the government of Canada has absorbed the cost of the write down and the CWB has been fully reimbursed . 
Yes. 
any interest charges which accrue from credit sales become part of the balance owing by the purchasing country . 
these amounts do not have any negative impact on the CWB pool accounts . 
health 
cancellation of Research Study on Seniors with Osteoporosis - Possibility of Restoration of Funding - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on February 18 , 1998 ) 
health Canada provided $ 3.6 M for the pilot and Phase I of a research project , the " Canadian Multicentre Osteoporo sis Study ( CAMOS ) " through the National Health Research and Development Program ( NHRDP ) and through the Seniors Independence Research Program ( SIRP ) which has now terminated . The 
objectives of Phase I were to evaluate the effectiveness of ultrasound measures of bone density in comparison with more expensive technology , to provide estimates of the prevalence and incidence of the main fractures associated with osteoporosis , and to analyse the socio - demographic and lifestyle risk factors associated with this disease . 
other partners are Merck Frosst , Eli Lilly , the Medical Research Council ( MRC ) , the Dairy Farmers of Canada , Proctor and Gamble Pharmaceuticals and the Osteoporosis Society of Canada . 
funding commenced in March 1993 and ends on March 31 , 1998 . CAMOS is now requesting funding for Phase II of the project , bringing the total request to $ 9M. 
clinical research , such as the CAMOS study , has always been fundable by the Medical Research Council . 
for some years , the National Health Research and Development Program ( NHRDP ) also accepted such projects . 
however , due to budget reductions in recent years and due to the recommendations of Program Review II to avoid duplication of efforts by federal agencies , clinical research is no longer eligible for funding by the NHRDP . 
the MRC continues to be the appropriate Canadian government agency to address requests for clinical research funding . 
the most recent applications from CAMOS to the MRC and other funding agencies have been unsuccessful in obtaining support , but MRC has encouraged CAMOS to reapply , and has provided detailed assistance in the preparation of a revised and improved application . 
health Canada has adopted a population health approach to further its mandate to maintain and improve the health of Canadians . 
this approach integrates action on a broad range of factors that affect the health of all Canadians ( such as the physical , economic and social environments ) . 
seniors ' health will continue to be addressed using this approach . 
orders OF THE DAY 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
twelfth Report of Committee of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the twelfth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( budget - Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee ) , presented in the Senate on February 25 , 1998 . 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
ninth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the ninth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( expenditure plan 1998 - 99 ) presented in the Senate on February 12 , 1998 . 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , the Senate ' s proposed budget for 1998 - 99 is $ 41,691,000 , which represents an overall increase of 9.8 per cent from the 1997 - 98 estimates . 
very simply , after several years of reduction , the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration is to restore the Senate ' s budget to a reasonable level in order to permit us to carry out our normal duties . 
although some of the reductions we implemented resulted from technological advances and streamlining of operations , others were nothing but false economies . 
we were merely deferring expenditures on items that were continually deteriorating and which , inevitably , needed to be replaced . 
there was always a concern that health and safety issues were not being properly addressed . 
our staff had little flexibility to deal with ongoing operations or to adapt to a changing environment . 
as I have stated , some of the 9.8 - per - cent increase is for matters beyond our control . 
for example , $ 1,106,000 , or 2.7 per cent of the increase , is for employee benefit plans . 
this is a statutory item , and it is calculated as a percentage of overall personnel costs . 
the percentage is set at the beginning of each year by the Treasury Board . 
historically , the final percentage of benefits to salaries has been increasing steadily from 10 per cent to 17 per cent over the four years . 
again this year , the Treasury Board has indicated to government departments and agencies that the budget should be set at 21 per cent of salaries for 1998 - 99 . 
for the Senate , this translates into an increase of $ 1,106,000 . 
another increase in the budget is for security and other operational costs involving the East Block , which , again , is beyond our control . 
in April 1996 , the Senate accepted from the House of Commons the responsibility for overall security and fire prevention at the East Block . 
this initiative is now in its second year of implementation and the security coverage has been extended to the refurbished 1910 wing , which has been reopened this year , and the new freight entrance . 
these new costs add at least 1.2 per cent to our 1997 - 98 budget . 
honourable senators , this is not a perfect budget from the Senate ' s point of view . 
there are many areas which will continue to be underfunded . 
for example , senators ' research and office budgets are still 22 per cent below authorized levels of funding . 
the amount set aside for committees remains insufficient to fund our ever - increasing committee activity which , as we all know , is the hallmark of the Senate . 
additional funds which may be required to cover operational shortfalls in 1998 - 99 may need to be the subject of a request for Supplementary Estimates later in the year . 
as far as future years go , although I cannot speak for the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration for next year , I think it is reasonable to assume that additional increases will be asked for so that we can have a phased - in approach to reinstate the Senate budget to its proper level . 
what , then , are the significant changes in this 1998 - 99 budget ? 
there are a number of increases compared to last year ' s budget . 
these include the budget items which were reduced last year to reflect election year expenditure trends , such as senators ' travel and committees . 
these have been partially reinstated to non - election year levels . 
as I mentioned , resource requirements related to the Senate ' s takeover of the East Block security and the reopening of the 1910 wing have been added . 
budget items related to the repair and upkeep of the Senate ' s capital asset base have been increased . 
as I have described , on the advice of Treasury Board the Senate , like all government departments , has increased its budget for the employer ' s contribution to the Public Service Superannuation Plan , the Canada - Quebec Pension Plan , supplementary death benefits and the unemployment insurance account . 
in the House of Commons , recognized political parties are provided with special funding . 
these funds are used for staff salaries , research contracts and special services such as media assistance . 
party research offices are also given all necessary office accommodation , such as equipment and telephones . 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration feels the time has come to provide some funding to both party caucuses , as well as perhaps independent senators . 
it was for this reason that it was agreed that a envelope should be created within the Senate budget for caucus research , but that this envelope would be decided on only after decisions are taken by the individual caucuses in the next few weeks , and in consultation with the independent senators . 
additional information on the operations of the Senate , including its 1998 - 99 budget , will be found in the report on planning and priorities , to be tabled next month shortly after the government presents the Estimates for the coming fiscal year . 
this document will focus on the priorities , plans , and expected results of the Senate administration in supporting senators and the institution of the Senate of Canada . 
it will also provide information on the remuneration , allowances , and budgets provided to individual senators . 
this , honourable senators , is what the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration envisions as the Senate budget for 1998 - 99 . 
are Canadians getting value for this money ? 
as someone who has sat in both Houses of Parliament , I can honestly say I believe so . 
many Canadians would not expect to hear that , on a per capita basis , the Senate costs them far less than any other legislative body in the country . 
the per person cost of the Senate is $ 1.50 , compared to $ 7.13 for the House of Commons . 
even if the Senate were the same size as the other place , it would only cost Canadians $ 4.50 . 
the Senate , while it appears as a legislature pas comme les autres due to its un - elected but nonetheless representative basis , contributes a great deal to the public policy process of this country . 
many senators have developed areas of specialization on social , economic , and cultural matters - we have heard about some of them today - and actively promote awareness of issues about which they care . 
veterans affairs , children rights , education , literacy , and drug dependency are among the many topics associated with individual senators . 
our committees have played influential roles in a number of issues such as post - secondary education , the Cape Breton Development Corporation , European integration , corporate governance , the mass media , child poverty , transportation , and veterans , to name only a few . 
as we are all well aware , our committees investigate key social issues , make recommendations for new policy initiatives , and help build social consensus around possible solutions . 
one university professor , C . E . S . Frank from Queen ' s , has written in his 1989 book that Senate committee ' s investigations are " usually of a higher standard than those of the committees of the House of Commons . " 
there is no doubt in my mind that the Senate is a vital part of our parliamentary system , promoting better policies and investigating a wide range of social , economic and cultural issues . 
honourable senators , I ask you to support the adoption of this report . 
in closing , I thank all of my colleagues who have served and are serving now on the Internal Economy Committee , in particular , Senator De Ban é , who heads our Subcommittee on Information Technology , and Senators Nolin and Poulin , who sit with me on the steering committee . 
to all of you , I express my deep appreciation . 
before I close , I also want to pay tribute to my colleague who preceded me as chair of the Internal Economy Committee , that relation of Senator Doyle , Senator Kenny . 
i believe it will be acknowledged on both sides of the chamber that Senator Kenny , during his period of stewardship , gave outstanding service to this chamber as a whole and to the individual senators who serve in it . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question of clarification . 
the chairman ' s speech just now provided a great deal more detail . 
is there a detailed report , and has that detailed report been circulated to all senators ? 
senator Rompkey : 
the answer to that is yes , it has . 
senator Kinsella : 
some of us did not get a copy of it . 
when was that detailed report circulated ? 
it is my understanding that what was tabled is a two - page document that is in the Journals of the Senate . 
what was not tabled is the detailed proposal , and I am wondering if we can get a copy of that . 
senator Rompkey : 
the executive summary was tabled , and the detailed report is forthcoming and will be circulated to everyone . 
senator Kinsella : 
the detailed report has yet to be circulated . 
it is forthcoming . 
senator Rompkey : 
that is right . 
senator Kinsella : 
we are being asked to approve a report , but we are at somewhat of a disadvantage in examining the detail . 
i do not recall whether this has been the practice in the past . 
perhaps others might participate in the debate so we are all very clear in what is happening . 
senator Rompkey : 
it is my understanding that this is exactly the same procedure as has been followed in the past . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I have a question . 
is Senator Rompkey saying that , in the past , the motion for concurrence in the report was accepted before the detail of the report was made available to the Senate ? 
senator Rompkey : 
i can only repeat what I said before , Senator Stewart . 
the practice being followed now is exactly the same practice that has been followed in the past . 
senator Kinsella : 
i understood that Senator Kenny wants to speak . 
perhaps he could provide more information that would enlighten us . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if there are further questions to Senator Rompkey , they should be posed now , and then I will entertain another speech . 
afterwards , I will not be able to entertain questions to Senator Rompkey . 
senator Kinsella : 
it is my understanding that another senator intervening and questioning the last speaker does not obviate the opportunity for me to ask another question of the first senator . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
not if that honourable senator is asking a question , but if he is making a speech , then we are into the next debate . 
if Senator Kenny wished to ask a question , that would leave it open for anyone else to ask a question of Senator Rompkey . 
senator Rompkey : 
may I clarify ? 
i will read again the pertinent part from the remarks I just made . 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I would like to pose a question . 
my understanding , Senator Rompkey , and correct me if I am wrong , is that in the past , a fairly succinct summary has been tabled in this institution . 
there have been large iterations available to both sides on the committee and to the caucuses . 
would the honourable senator confirm for us that , in fact , what he has tabled here today is the same as what has been tabled the past two previous times and provides the same level of detail that we have had on those two occasions ? 
senator Rompkey : 
yes , I would like to confirm that . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I am torn between calling for adjournment of the debate and asking a question . 
i am not a member of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , and nothing has been circulated to me on that subject . 
i did see a document and inquired of its meaning . 
i did make overtures to Senator Rompkey , the esteemed chairman , requesting that independent senators be addressed . 
however , I have no assurance that this will be done . 
i am still not sure that agreement on this issue today will complete the matter . 
discussion about how to redistribute research money may be a nice wish , but there may be no decision . 
there might be a good understanding to redistribute it according to pro rata of the official parties , or pro rata of the senators in the Senate , or , if it is pro rata , by party . 
of course , you will eliminate those who are not yet appointed , and you will eliminate those who are independent . 
does it make a bigger pro rata , or is it half - and - half to both caucuses ? 
i do not know . 
i wish to know more before I give my consent . 
senators may do what they wish ; however , I can also object . 
i did not hear about this until I heard a rumour that there was a special item that could be of some interest to me . 
i had to discern what the item of concern to me might be . 
no one informed me , and I did not go to the Internal Economy Committee . 
i should like to have a response to my query . 
senator Rompkey : 
no decision will be taken until there is adequate discussion within the caucuses . 
i wish to assure my colleague , as I tried to do earlier this day in an informal way , that in my own mind , clearly the independent senators must be given consideration . 
i do undertake to keep him informed on the progress of the discussions , so that when the time comes , his responsibilities as an independent senator and his rights as an independent senator are fully considered . 
senator Kenny : 
honourable senators , I have a question for to the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration . 
i share the concerns that some other members have about this particular item in the budget . 
i seek the assurance of the Chair that he would bring that particular item to the chamber so we could deal with it here . 
i am happy with the rest of the budget . 
however , that particular item merits further clarification and discussion . 
is the Chair prepared to entertain my proposal ? 
senator Rompkey : 
yes , I am , honourable senators . 
clearly , it merits full discussion in both caucuses and in the chamber . 
it is an amount for senators and , therefore , senators should take the final decision on how it is spent and administered . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I wish to be very clear : 
earlier this afternoon , I walked into the Senate and someone said that there is a line in the budget that might be of interest to me . 
that is fine , but it confirmed what I had done before . 
i am very pleased to have been informed earlier , as the senator mentioned . 
i usually do not mention my conversations , but since he mentioned it , I will repeat it . 
earlier this afternoon , I was given that line . 
i am of the same opinion as Senator Kenny that the matter should be discussed in this chamber . 
as the chairman , you may decide that it is your wish that you will proceed the way you have expressed , yet it may not be the wish of the committee . 
committee members may wish to decide , in committee , that funds will be shared between caucuses . 
if you wish to have this report adopted today , perhaps you should give us your commitment that this section will be suspended from your budget , in order that it may be discussed by the full Senate . 
it should not pass simply on the basis that if there is agreement all round , there is no need for discussion . 
as a last resort , I wish to ensure that it is not passed today . 
there will be ample discussion because I know some members do not agree with this measure . 
members of both parties do not agree as to the redistribution of that money . 
i do not know how the other independent senators feel . 
before I agree to this , I would appreciate hearing some commitment that there will be ample opportunity to discuss the matter in the Senate chamber . 
otherwise , I will ask for the adjournment of the debate and , if I have someone second that motion , I will adjourn the debate and speak much longer on the other items of the budget . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
we discussed the case of independent senators several times in committee . 
we did not wish to impose the rule of the majority of two caucuses on three or four senators , who had no chance to defend their point of view . 
unfortunately , you were not present during these discussions . 
it was never the committee ' s intention to deny you access to this money . 
the problem is finding the best way to do so . 
that is the commitment you received from the Speaker earlier and it is also that of the entire committee . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
i am certainly glad to hear I was not at the committee meeting , since I am not a member . 
i have attended more committee meetings as a non - member than senators who actually are members . 
i have been present in more committees than some senators who are members of committees . 
that means I attended out of goodwill , because I am interested . 
i cannot be told simply that I was not at the committee . 
please be advised that I am not a member of any committee . 
i still have an interest because I worked hard in the House of Commons on their committee as chairman of the member ' s services . 
i certainly have something to offer . 
senator Kenny invited me to all the meetings , provided me with all the documentation and I cooperated with him , as I hope to cooperate with Senator Rompkey . 
however , I will not use the excuse that I did not go to as many committees as I should have because I had a heart attack . 
i am good friends with Senator Nolin and Senator Rompkey , but I know people who have experience , and who seem to be puzzled . 
if I see senators who are puzzled , needless to say that I am too . 
i do not want to have a full debate in public if we are all in agreement ; that takes care of it . 
if not , make a commitment here that there will be a debate in the Senate as to how to redistribute this research money . 
i want a Senate that functions , and I believe major political parties have the right to have caucus research funds because they are carrying the majority of the work . 
i am not against it , per se . 
however , I want a commitment that you will do what you say you intend to do , but I want it to be very official . 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , in response to Senator Kenny , I said that we would bring the item back to the Senate before any expenditures were agreed to . 
there is a notional amount in there . 
no moneys have been spent , no decisions have been taken , and none will be taken until we bring the matter back to the chamber . 
in response to Senator Prud ' homme , as far as the committee is concerned , you have two - thirds of the steering committee here . 
i think that is as solid an undertaking as we can give you that the committee will continue to be sympathetic to your position as an independent senator , and that we will keep you informed and allow you to participate in the final decision of the expenditure of those funds . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
aboriginal Governance 
consideration of Report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee Requesting Authorization to Travel and Engage Services - Report Adopted 
leave having been given to revert to Reports of Committees , Order No. 4 : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Watt , seconded by the Honourable Senator Chalifoux , for the adoption of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples ( budget - study on Aboriginal governance ) , presented in the Senate on February 18 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Kinsella ) . 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , this debate was adjourned by Senator Kinsella yesterday or the day before . 
he was seeking clarification as to what we were committing to in terms of where this study on self - government is going . 
unfortunately , at the time we did not have all our horses here in the house , and we got off topic . 
last night we had a fairly lengthy committee meeting . 
of course , the vast number of our members were there , and many questions were resolved . 
this phase - one budget is strictly to provide for the fleshing out of the working document that we have before us , to put together a work plan that we believe will take us in the direction we want to go on the question of self - government . 
if at the end of that exercise it is considered that we ought to come back for a phase - two budget , that will happen . 
however , by completing phase one , that in no way obligates the Senate to go further . 
the decision will be made at that time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
rights of the Unborn Child 
motion to Establish Special Joint Parliamentary Committee - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Stanley Haidasz , pursuant to notice of February 12 , 1998 , moved : 
that a Special Joint Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons , to be styled the Special Joint Committee on the Unborn Child , be appointed to examine and report upon the feasibility of legislating in the area of fetal rights and the protection to the unborn child , with particular reference to : 
( a ) the lack of protection in current Canadian law of the unborn child ; 
( b ) the interests of the state in providing some measures to protect the unborn child , thereby securing the well - being of future generations of Canadians ; 
( c ) the application of the rights and freedoms entrenched in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and how they relate to the unborn child ; 
( d ) the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in the 1997 case , Winnipeg Child and Family Services ( Northwest Area ) v. G . ( D . F . ) , which signalled a gap in current Canadian law respecting the rights of the unborn ; and 
( e ) the comments made by the Supreme Court of Canada , in the above - noted case , that any measures to provide protection in law to the unborn child have complex ramifications and , as such , should be considered by Parliament , not the Canadian courts , since Parliament is in a better position to assess the desirability , the impact and the consequences of such measures ; 
that the Committee take into consideration Canadian and international law , and in particular , the Criminal Code amendment , in 1969 , to the homicide provision concerning the killing of a child before or during its birth ; 
that the Committee report back to Parliament with proposed alternative measures to protect the unborn child in a manner that is consistent with the Constitution of Canada ; 
that the Committee also make recommendations to Parliament respecting the desirability of establishing further studies and inquiries into the feasibility of legislating restrictions in the area of experimental treatment of the fetus and of new reproductive technologies ; 
that the Committee be composed of seven Members of the House of Commons and six members of the Senate ; 
that a quorum of the Committee be six members , provided both Houses are represented ; 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the Committee have the power to retain the services of expert , professional , technical and clerical staff ; 
that the Committee have the power to report to Parliament from time to time and that it present its final report no later than December 31 , 2000 ; and 
honourable senators , if you look at the text of this motion , I think it is clear , simple and self - explanatory . 
i will not make a speech on the motion ; I will , however , put it into perspective for you . 
as you know , there have been three judgments of the Supreme Court of Canada in the past two years dealing with the matter of fetal rights . 
each time , the judges of the Supreme Court stated that it is up to Parliament - honourable senators in this chamber and our colleagues in the other place - to draft some kind of ruling , statement or legislation to fill the gap that exists with regard to the absence of legislation dealing with fetal rights . 
hence , I am introducing this motion . 
i wanted to introduce a bill , but my legal advisors were unable to come up with one . 
this motion asks for a joint committee of the Senate and House of Commons to study the feasibility of legislation insofar as fetal rights are concerned and the protection of the unborn child , including legislative restrictions in the area of experimental treatment of the fetus and of new reproductive technologies . 
the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies made their report about two and a half years ago , and we have not heard from any minister of the Crown about any measures or legislation recommended in the report . 
this motion , therefore , is meant to replace the abdication of the government in this area . 
it has done nothing on fetal rights and reproductive technologies , as asked of us by the Supreme Court at least three times in their judgments . 
i hope an honourable senator present in the chamber today will adjourn this motion in their name and decide whether they would like to take up my challenge to carry the torch of conducting this inquiry . 
this motion asks for a report by December 31 of the year 2000 ; hence , you have a lot of time to study this very important and crucial issue of fetal rights . 
thank you very much for your patience . 
Adieu and God bless you in your deliberations . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask Senator Haidasz a question . 
am I correct in thinking that the legal vacuum to which he has made reference - not in those words - is the result of the tie vote that took place in this house some years ago ? 
senator Haidasz : 
on Bill C - 43 ? 
senator Stewart : 
Yes. 
the government of the day did bring in a bill and , for one reason or another , that bill did not pass this house . 
senator Haidasz : 
there is no law regarding the protection of the foetus . 
the court , in three recent judgments , has asked the Parliament of Canada to come up with some legislation because it said that , at some point in the life of the foetus , the state has an interest in the welfare of the unborn child . 
this has not been resolved by the government nor by any minister with any initiative . 
i took the initiative to begin a study on this very important matter , a study to see what action is feasible to fill this gap . 
senator Stewart : 
as I recall the vote , those who were against abortion at any stage voted against that government bill . 
others voted against it because they felt it went too far in restricting what they thought of as the right to an abortion . 
does the honourable senator have any reason to believe that a vote put to this house now would produce a different result ? 
have the people who were adamantly against abortion changed their position ? 
will we go through the same exercise , with the same frustration at the end ? 
does the honourable senator have any reason to believe or any evidence to adduce that there has been a change in opinion ? 
senator Haidasz : 
honourable senators , since the vote on Bill C - 43 about six years ago , there have been court cases referred to the Supreme Court of Canada dealing with the rights of the foetus . 
the latest one was a Winnipeg case where the mother sniffed glue as a bad habit and she was harming her foetus . 
the social workers took her to court . 
another woman here in Ottawa shot herself in the abdomen to try to get rid of her foetus . 
there was a third case , also . 
in each of those cases , the Supreme Court called upon the Parliament of Canada to render some kind of direction or decision for the court . 
even Justice Martha Wilson believed and stated in her judgment that , at some time in the life of a foetus , the state has an interest . 
the court has asked us on three different occasions to bring in some legislation . 
i could not come up with any so I decided to suggest a study on this case . 
we have since had the deposition of a report from the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies . 
this motion covers that issue . 
i am simply calling upon both houses to set up a joint committee to study the feasibility and the plausibility of possible legislation . 
we need some solution to declare the rights of the foetus . 
the Supreme Court said the state has an interest at some point in the life of the foetus . 
no one has taken up the challenge . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
senator Haidasz : 
i respect the honourable senator ' s interpretation of those three judgments as published by the court . 
my interpretation is that someone should take the initiative to study this matter . 
new reproductive technology is a burning issue . 
parliament has done nothing . 
will we abdicate our powers of legislating ? 
that is my challenge . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition : 
honourable senators , I have a different dimension from the kind of question posed by Senator Stewart . 
mine is from a federal - provincial perspective . 
for the past eight years , the federal government and the provincial governments have been examining the Inter - American Convention on Human Rights to see whether Canada could ratify that convention . 
as you know , before Canada enters into international treaty obligations in areas of jurisdiction that affect the provinces , it must respect the constitutional convention as established in the 1930 s with the labour conventions case , which was a ruling of the judicial committee of the Privy Council . 
that case establishes that the provinces must agree before Canada , federally , can ratify a treaty . 
therefore , there have been serious federal - provincial negotiations on this convention . 
it is my understanding that one of the major stumbling blocks is Article IV of that convention which recognizes and predicates all of the human rights in the Inter - American Convention of Human Rights to all persons from the moment of conception . 
many provinces are having difficulty complying with that section of the Inter - American Convention of Human Rights . 
does the honourable senator have any reason to believe that provincial governments and territorial governments - because they are involved as well as federal authorities - are close to being able to deal with that issue , which speaks directly to the matter he has brought before us ? 
senator Haidasz : 
on that particular point , honourable senators , I do not have a solution , but in view of the non - action of the government on the recommendations of the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies - which is one of the items in this motion - I believe there should be some kind of initiative to at least study the recommendations of the royal commission . 
millions of dollars were spent on the study of reproductive technologies . 
the government has not issued any substantive long - term statement . 
in my opinion , it is about time that a joint committee of both houses at least studied the feasibility of some kind of legislation in answer to the challenge put forth to legislators by the commission members . 
if there is no interest , then there is no interest . 
i could withdraw my motion ask for a vote , or ask someone to adjourn the debate . 
as of this minute , I am leaving this place forever . 
good - bye . 
i have said my last word . 
on motion of Senator Chalifoux , debate adjourned . 
the Senate 
tributes 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Speaker is not supposed to speak when honourable members are retiring from this chamber , but I wish to express my regrets and best wishes to the two senators who are leaving us today . 
i should also like to point out that there will be another departure from the Senate . 
our Chief Page , Greg Doiron , will be leaving us . 
this is his last day of service . 
he will be close to the Senate but he will not be here in the chamber . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Jacques H é bert : 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , we had intended to meet during that week but , given the fact that the Senate will not be sitting , there was some uncertainty as to the feasibility of going ahead . 
however , if other committees are meeting , we , too , will meet . 
senator H é bert : 
we will add the Foreign Affairs Committee to that list , then . 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
honourable senators , the Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders Committee will be meeting during that time period , too . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 45 
Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
new Senators 
introduction 
visitors in Gallery 
the Late Gabrielle L é ger 
tributes 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
international Women ' s Day 
Canadian Flag 
ruling of House of Commons Speaker on Reform Party Initiative 
Paralympic Winter Games 
participation of Canadian Athletes in 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
unemployment in Rural Canada 
St. Patrick ' s Day 
Felicitations 
Canadian Flag 
ruling of House of Commons Speaker on Reform Party Initiative 
euthanasia 
dismissal of Murder Charge Against Dr. Nancy Morrison in Halifax , Nova Scotia 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
tabled 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
tabling of Supplementary Estimates ( B ) 
state of Financial System 
interim Report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee Tabled 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
first Reading 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Main Estimates 1998 - 99 , and Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
notice of Motion to Refer Privy Council Vote 25 to the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
notice of Motion to Refer Vote 10 to the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
canada - Taiwan Parliamentary Friendship Group 
report of Canadian Delegation to Taiwan Tabled 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Report of Delegation Tabled 
Canadian War Museum 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
notion of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
civil Code of Quebec 
difficulties and Problems Arising from Section 35 - Notice of Inquiry 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
notice of Inquiry 
international Francophonie Day 
notice of Inquiry 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
post - Secondary Education 
transport 
decision on Relocation of Marine Atlantic Headquarters - Government Position 
industry 
possible Crisis in Failure to Adjust Government Computers to Year 2000 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Decision of National Energy Board - Guarantee of Supply to New Brunswick 
prince Edward Island 
possible Appointment of Acadian Senator 
visitor in Gallery 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
national Finance 
proposed Merger of Royal Bank and Bank of Montreal - Government Position 
prime Minister ' s Office 
appointment of Ethics Counsellor Responsible to Parliament - Government Position 
labour 
review of Canada Post Corporation - Request for Progress Report 
orders OF THE DAY 
depository Bills and Notes Bill 
report of Committee Adopted 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Point of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling Reserved 
point of Order 
visitor in Gallery 
canada Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Adjourned 
agriculture 
motion Urging Deferral of Licensing of Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone Pending Study - Debate Continued 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
new Senators 
introduction 
the Hon. the Speaker having informed the Senate that there were senators without , waiting to be introduced : 
hon. Joan Cook , of St. John ' s , Newfoundland , introduced between Hon. B . Alasdair Graham , P . C . , and Hon. P . Derek Lewis . 
hon. Archibald ( Archie ) Hynd Johnstone , of Kensington , Prince Edward Island , introduced between Hon. B . Alasdair Graham , P . C . and Hon. Catherine S . Callbeck . 
hon. Ross Fitzpatrick , of Kelowna , British Columbia , introduced between Hon. B . Alasdair Graham , P . C . , and Hon. Raymond J . Perrault , P . C . 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that each of the honourable senators named above had made the subscribed declaration of qualification required by the Constitution Act , 1867 , in the presence of the Clerk of the Senate , the Commissioner appointed to receive and witness the said declaration . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am delighted to wish all francophones in Canada a fine Semaine mondiale de la Francophonie . 
at the same time , may I wish each and every one of you the happiest St. Patrick ' s Day . 
when I think of Senator Joan Cook , I cannot help but think of Charlotte Whitton ' s famous comment : 
whatever she does , a woman must do twice as well as any man to be thought of as just half as good . 
then the former mayor of Ottawa added with characteristic flair : 
luckily , it is not that difficult . 
when I think of Joan Cook ' s consummate energy and enthusiasm , I think of a whole lot of lives wrapped up in one . 
i think of a woman who has always worked twice as hard as anyone around her , who has been the epitome of always doing a little more than you have been paid to , always giving a little more than you have had to , always trying a little harder than you probably often wanted to , always aiming a little higher than maybe even you had thought possible , and always giving a lot of thanks to God for health , family and friends . 
i think of only a few of her busy lives today as we welcome her , a wonderful breath of fresh air to the Senate of Canada . 
i think of the life of a successful business woman . 
i think of the astute and committed political activist . 
i think of the life of a volunteer who never said never to any request for help and support from any facet of her community and her province . 
June Callwood once observed that the best word in the English language is " justice . " 
justice has been the engine of this straight - talking , hard - working Newfoundlander who , through the United Church , helped found Naomi House , a shelter for women in St. John ' s . 
the list of her simple , personal commitments to the well - being of those around her is lengthy and a cause for reflection . 
senator Cook served as a member for a national consultation on women and poverty . 
she was also a volunteer with the Girl Guides of Canada , eventually being recognized as a national life member of the organization . 
senator Cook has worked with the Canadian Mental Health Association and is currently a member of the General Hospital ' s Board of Trustees . 
senator Cook has been a shining light of friendship and compassion , relieving the fear , attending to the needs of the homeless and the young , never fearing to dive in where the need is greatest . 
no task has been too great , no contribution has been too much . 
she has given little people the inspiration to stand up straight and tall with pride in their own humanity and with the conviction that no man and no woman was better than any other . 
now to me , that is real leadership . 
however , like all leaders , we may anticipate Senator Cook has her faults . 
probably her greatest is her honesty and plain talk . 
honourable senators , prepare for the broadsides , because with Senator Joan Cook on board we can expect lots of truth and a whole lot of the other stuff along with it . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , when I think of lovely Prince Edward Island , I think of the gentle province where the Fathers of Confederation negotiated the terms of union and conceived the great national dream . 
i think of communities and traditions and lifestyles which have been passed on from generation to generation , communities which in many ways are the glue of our national identity , communities where the values which anchor our country have been renewed across the decades . 
senator Archibald Johnstone was born and raised in communities such as these , where the famous Island spirit of self - reliance and responsibility to others was nurtured and where people understood the value of cooperation in good times and in bad . 
i stress the word " cooperation . " 
islanders have always been renowned for this , not because they expect something in return but because they know that cooperation is essential to success at all levels . 
senator Johnstone has enjoyed great success in many areas . 
his business endeavours have borne much fruit . 
so , too , has his very deep involvement with Island organizations related to agriculture and tourism to which he has lent much of his time . 
he has served as president of the Prince Edward Island Federation of Agriculture , as an executive member of the Canadian Federation of Agriculture , to speak of only a few of his personal efforts with regard to the interests of his home province . 
in all these efforts , he has shown the generous Island spirit of cooperation and responsibility - responsibility for a future which is shaped around lifestyles which are good and profitable at the same time ; a future shaped around the communities Islanders hold dear and the family values they know to be the real anchor of our Canadian identity . 
i am proud to welcome to this place the Island spirit in the person of Archie Johnstone . 
honourable senators may recall that his beautiful Island , so central to the foundation of our nation , was also renowned for having the highest per capita enlistment of any place in Canada during World War II , along with the highest casualty rate as well . 
senator Johnstone was very much part of that remarkable contribution to freedom , serving as a crew member with the Royal Air Force Heavy Bomber Squadron based in England . 
all of us , at one time , have probably reflected on Sir Winston Churchill ' s famous tribute to the courage and skill of British airmen : " Never in the field of human conflict was so much owed by so many to so few . " 
today we see those words as a fitting tribute as well to all those Canadians , such as Archie Johnstone , who served in dangerous times to liberate Europe in its darkest hours . 
senator Johnstone , we are privileged to have you join us in this chamber . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , perhaps it is more than coincidental that on St. Patrick ' s Day we should introduce officially to the Senate chamber a person with such deep roots in County Cork , the Honourable Ross Fitzpatrick . 
senator Fitzpatrick , on every opportunity I have had to visit your wonderful province , I have had a chance to think a little about the expanse of this great country from the perspective of the aerial traveller . 
i have thought about the long distance that separates my home province from yours , and the fact that the journey , if we project from Senator Cook ' s home in St. John ' s to Vancouver , is comparable . 
if we relate eastward extension to westward extension , it is the equivalent of spanning the Atlantic , plus the entire width of Europe . 
i have thought of the ideals , values and symbols which unite our tolerant , freedom - loving people across 3.8 million square miles of a crowded planet . 
i have thought of the aerial topography of Canada : water , lakes , ice , the Laurentian Shield , the Prairies and then the reality of British Columbia , from its granite alpine peaks to its spectacular rivers , the wonderful coastline of dense rain forests and glacier mountains - the kinds of mountains not only loved by British Columbians but also worshipped by British Columbians and envied by all other Canadians . 
Ross Fitzpatrick has become a symbol of the tremendous dynamism , energy and vigour which is all a part of the legendary British Columbia story . 
he has achieved well and succeeded well , and probably been a model of John Fitzgerald Kennedy ' s famous remark that once you say you are going to settle for second , then that is what happens to you in life . 
senator Fitzpatrick never settled for second . 
he built innovative and visionary businesses in fields as diverse as aerospace , energy and mining , gas production and wineries . 
these were all wrapped up in enormous personal drive and big dreams , and the huge sense of adventure which drove so many remarkable Canadians in that magnificent province . 
senator Fitzpatrick has opened up big mining projects , and at the same time he has earned much environmental acclaim . 
Viceroy Resources Corporation , which he founded in 1984 , has won no fewer than six environmental awards , including The Financial Post ' s 1992 Environmental Award for Business , and the 1993 Environmental Award from the Prospecters and Developers Association of Canada . 
honourable senators , Senator Fitzpatrick has always believed that you give back to your province , your region and your community what it has given to you . 
he has generously supported the Kelowna General Hospital Foundation , the Canadian Cancer Society and the University of British Columbia . 
senator Fitzpatrick , we welcome you to this place . 
in the service of Canada and this chamber , I know that you will never settle for second . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
much of the criticism directed this way , our way , arises from the fact that senators are appointed . 
by itself , this is an anomaly which is distasteful to many , even in this very place . 
to condemn the appointed Senate simply because it is appointed may allow for a colourful verbiage but it obscures some of the basic realities of this place . 
our new colleagues will soon find that the wide knowledge , experience and background of their colleagues compare more than favourably with those found in any elected legislature in this country , including the House of Commons . 
our new colleagues will soon find that the scrutiny of legislation is done here in a far more careful and less partisan way than in the House of Commons . 
even some of our most voluble critics admit that Senate ' s role in correcting bills , warning of flaws in them , even raising their constitutionality on occasion , are an essential contribution to the legislative process . 
i have no doubt that it will not be too long before Senators Cook , Johnstone and Fitzpatrick not only recognize these and the many other positive features of the Senate but also make their own special contributions to them . 
my colleagues on this side and I wish them well as they assume their new responsibilities . 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government has appropriately pointed out that there could be no better timing for the appointment to the Senate of a Canadian of Irish descent than on St. Patrick ' s Day . 
as they say , it may be the luck of the Irish that the dates coincide . 
in any case , it is a wonderful event for Canada that Senator Fitzpatrick has now assumed his seat in this place . 
as well , the appointments of Senators Johnstone and Cook are outstanding , and they will serve to reinforce the effective work the Senate does . 
they are talented people in their own right . 
during Ross ' s long and successful career , he has been active in resource development , including oil and gas exploration and mining . 
he has been the founder , co - chairman and chief executive officer of a number of resource development corporations operating not only in Canada and the United States but also offshore . 
in recent years , Ross has added another industry to his list of activities . 
we hope that part of the marketing strategy will be the holding of sampling sessions in various parts of the country , including here . 
it is a great product . 
in addition to this extensive list of endeavours , Ross has found time to involve himself deeply in community affairs and public interest activities , some of them noted by the Leader of the Opposition , including higher education , the arts and politics . 
early in his career , Ross was an executive assistant to a member of the federal cabinet and developed an interest in politics at that time . 
i predict that he will make a significant contribution to this place and thereby to all of Canada . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis : 
honourable senators , I would also like to congratulate and welcome to this chamber our three new members , Senator Johnstone , Senator Fitzpatrick , and Senator Cook . 
specifically , I wish to say a few words about the new senator from my province of Newfoundland . 
senator Cook has her origins in a small fishing community on the south coast of the province . 
as such , she has a personal knowledge of the problems and conditions of life in such areas outside the larger centres . 
although Senator Cook left her community many years ago to take work in St. John ' s , she never cut her ties and has remained in tune with life in coastal Newfoundland . 
through her work as an assistant in various business endeavours , Senator Cook has gained a vast knowledge of the community and commercial life of the province , in addition to which she has been a tireless volunteer worker for her church and its organizations . 
she has given many years of service to various charitable groups and , in particular , to the Girl Guides Association , by which she has been appropriately honoured . 
i cannot omit to mention Senator Cook ' s contribution to the political field . 
i have been aware , from personal knowledge and experience going back over 30 years , of the tremendous organizational work she carried out for her political party in all aspects of organization , at the constituency as well as provincial and federal levels . 
senator Cook did not stint herself and has always been available to carry out such work , even during the dark days when her party was out of office . 
i imagine there are quite a few members in this chamber who have experienced that situation . 
in fact , she was one of those who helped maintain her party during such trying times . 
i can assure senators that Senator Cook is a worthwhile addition to this chamber , and I look forward to a great contribution from her in our work . 
hon. Catherine Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I am pleased and honoured today to welcome three new senators to this house : 
Ross Fitzpatrick from British Columbia , Joan Cook from Newfoundland , and of course Archie Johnstone from my native province of Prince Edward Island . 
i am sure that they will demonstrate in this chamber the same vigour , intelligence , and commitment that has distinguished them in their respective communities . 
i would like to extend a special greeting to Senator Johnstone , whom I have known and respected for many years . 
senator Graham has spoken at length about his accomplishments and achievements , and there have been many . 
he has also pointed out that Senator Johnstone has been extremely active in the affairs of the province and the country . 
he has received many awards , over 20 in fact , including a certificate of appreciation from the Royal Canadian Legion , a distinguished service award from the Canadian Red Cross , and an award of merit from the P.E.I. Association of Community Schools . 
he has been and still is active in over 30 organizations . 
they include the Travel Industry Association of Prince Edward Island , the College of Piping and Celtic Performing Arts of Canada , and the Board of Governors of the University of Prince Edward Island . 
honourable senators , it is very evident that he is an exceptional person with great vision and will be a significant asset to the Senate of Canada . 
just last Friday night , I attended a function held to honour his appointment to the Senate . 
it was sponsored by his hometown of Kensington , the Tourism Association , and the Chamber of Commerce . 
at that event , several people spoke of his valuable contribution to the area , both on a personal and professional level . 
that , honourable senators , demonstrates the high regard that Islanders have for Archie Johnstone . 
i am very pleased today to stand in this house to welcome this fellow Islander to the Senate of Canada , and I am pleased that his wife , Elicia , and two of his four children are in the gallery today , along with some of his other friends . 
congratulations , Senator Johnstone . 
visitors in Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I draw your attention to a distinguished group of visitors in our gallery . 
honourable senators , I would also draw your attention to another group of visitors in our gallery . 
it is the Royal Canadian Army Cadet Corp No. 1888 from the province of Ontario , and they are accompanied by their Commanding Officer , Captain Gary Bonnell . 
i wish to point out that I was informed of their visit by Honourable Senator Kelly . 
the Late Gabrielle L é ger 
tributes 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with the death of Gabrielle L é ger , the wife of our former Governor General , on March 10 , Canada lost one of its most distinguished citizens . 
when Gabrielle Carmel met a young French Canadian through friends in Paris in 1937 for an evening of dinner and theatre , she was a little apprehensive about the blind date . 
the young lawyer , a graduate of the University of Montreal , was earning his doctorate in letters at the Sorbonne . 
no doubt they were both proud to trace their respective ancestries through generations of Quebec country people . 
no doubt he spoke to her of his brother Paul - Emile , who was then studying for the priesthood , and the back country village of Saint - Anicet where he was raised . 
as the famous line about first love would have it , they gave each other a smile with the future in it . 
Gabrielle married Jules L é ger a year later . 
the L é gers moved to Ottawa shortly thereafter , where he took a job as a radio reporter , a lecturer in diplomatic history , and finally , as the international situation deteriorated , as an associate editor of Le Droit , where he became renowned for his fervent denunciations of fascism . 
he went on to become one of Canada ' s most admired and distinguished diplomats - a genius in the art of mediation and compromise , someone from whom ideas sprang off his imagination like sparks off flint . 
in his extraordinary career , whether it was as part of the wonderful team around Lester Pearson which resolved the Suez crisis or his dramatic efforts to achieve calmer waters in Canada ' s stormy , difficult relations with Charles de Gaulle during the sixties , Gaby worked by his side . 
they were real partners . 
this was real teamwork . 
in doing so , the hundreds of tiny threads which bound them together developed a special alchemy of their own . 
when Jules L é ger suffered a stroke within six months of his appointment as Governor General of Canada in 1974 , Gaby - a tiny woman whose enormous smile made one forget the long years spent in the corridors of power ; whose verve and warmth made one forget the depth of her knowledge of literature , architecture , fine cuisine and history - devoted herself to her husband in most remarkable ways . 
on leaving the Governor General ' s residence in 1978 , she confessed her fear of retirement , telling a journalist at the time that all she might have to do would be to make her bed and scrub the bathtub . 
such domestic obligations were not to be hers , however , as history would strike out a new , fascinating phase in the distinguished life of Gabrielle L é ger . 
that same year , the Heritage Canada Foundation created an award in her honour which is still the principal honour in the heritage field . 
in 1979 , she was named Chancellor of the University of Ottawa . 
when the Jules and Paul - Emile L é ger Foundation was created by a special act of the Canadian Parliament in 1981 , Madam L é ger was named its co - president with Paul - Emile Cardinal L é ger , one of the country ' s best loved heroes . 
as Archbishop of Montreal , he had surprised and indeed fascinated the Catholic church and the country at large when in 1968 he resigned his post as head of the diocese , and became a missionary among the lepers in Cameroon . 
i heard firsthand how Cardinal L é ger was revered in Cameroon when , during an election - observing mission to that country in 1992 , I visited the centre he had established . 
under the auspices of the foundation , Gaby L é ger would follow the heroic work of the cardinal , travelling to 27 countries , helping abandoned children and lepers . 
honourable senators , I pay tribute to Gabrielle L é ger , a slip of a woman with a great big heart , who served her country so well . 
i pay tribute to a love story which will always be one of the most beautiful chapters in the history of our country that Jules and Gaby L é ger revered and served so well over the decades . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
Beaudouin : 
honourable senators , I wish to pay tribute to Gabrielle L é ger , the widow of the former Governor General of Canada , His Excellency , the Right Honourable Jules L é ger . 
Mrs. L é ger died last Tuesday at the age of 81 . 
born in Montreal in 1916 , she studied in Paris and married Jules L é ger in 1938 . 
he , as we know , had a remarkable career as a diplomat before becoming Governor General of Canada . 
Mrs. L é ger has left us fond memories . 
she chaired the Jules and Paul - É mile L é ger Foundation . 
this foundation was created by special legislation by Parliament in 1981 , and operates in Canada and the third world . 
in Canada , the foundation helps women who are victims of violence , the homeless , young people and seniors in difficulty . 
in the third world , the foundation is active in 28 countries and allocates its resources to international development , emergency aid , abandoned children , health and lepers . 
Mrs. L é ger , a Companion of the Order of Canada , admirably seconded her husband , who , it will be remembered , suffered a stroke only a few months after his installation as Governor General of Canada . 
she helped read the Throne Speech . 
in 1978 , the Heritage Canada Foundation created the Gabrielle L é ger award . 
it became the most prestigious award for the protection of Canadian heritage . 
Mrs. L é ger was the Chancellor of the University of Ottawa from 1979 to 1985 . 
as dean and law professor at that institution , I had the opportunity to see her at work in a university setting , where she performed her duties admirably . 
canada has just lost a great lady . 
i wish to express my deepest sympathies to her sister , Berthe Dupuis , her three grandchildren , Paul , Diane and Marie Fr é chette , and her two nieces , Aline Dupuis Aumais and Louise Dupuis . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
international Women ' s Day 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as many of you know , March 8 was International Women ' s Day , which marked the beginning of International Women ' s Week celebrated during the week of March 8 - 14 . 
international Women ' s Week allows Canadians to celebrate women ' s achievements and to face with renewed energy the task of creating full equality for all women , a task which should be met head on at all opportunities . 
the theme for this year ' s International Women ' s Week was " The Celebration of Women ' s Rights - A Lifelong Commitment . " 
this theme was chosen to coincide with the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on December 10 of this year , and it highlights the importance of women ' s human rights while underscoring the future commitment needed in the advancement of women ' s equality . 
canada has been a leader , both internationally and at home , in the advancement of women . 
from our support of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women , to our proposed reaffirmation of rape as a war crime that was accepted in the Beijing Platform for Action at the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women in September 1995 , and to our leadership in rallying countries to join in the global ban on the use of land - mines , we have made an international impact . 
at home , Canadian women have made significant progress towards economic equality . 
the wage gap between women and men working full - time has narrowed . 
in 1982 , the average woman earned only 53 per cent of the amount earned by the average man . 
by 1993 , this figure had risen to 72 per cent . 
women have also moved quickly into entrepreneurship , starting their own businesses at three times the rate of men , and with a higher success rate . 
about 25 per cent of all Canadian business owners are now women . 
although much remains to be done to achieve full equality , the voices of women are being heard . 
today more than ever , women are taking leading roles in business and government , and no more so than in this chamber where we are now 29 per cent of its participants . 
the evidence suggests that the perspective women bring forth as leaders is making society work better for all Canadians . 
Canadian Flag 
ruling of House of Commons Speaker on Reform Party Initiative 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , during the past few weeks we have been witness to what is termed the " flag flap , " the spectacle of the flag being used as a prop or a foil for what clearly is cover for a very divisive and dangerous agenda . 
opinions were strongly expressed , emotions were genuinely felt , and , yes , at times there was overblown rhetoric on both sides of the debate . 
having said that , I stood on the Hill on that February day in 1965 and watched the new Canadian flag being unfurled . 
since that time , I believe the vast majority of Canadians have felt a deep sense of pride when they have seen the easily recognized , distinctive flag celebrated around the world - whether it is watching Jacques Villeneuve standing at the centre podium after a Formula 1 race , or Catriona LeMay - Doan , Annie Perreault or Donovan Bailey celebrating their Olympic gold medals , or as a friendly welcome to Canadians travelling abroad , at Canadian embassies and consulates , or , most of all , celebrating the contributions of members of our armed forces as they serve all over the world . 
make no mistake , honourable senators , about what we are witnessing in the other place . 
it is not what the official opposition would have us believe . 
oh , yes , they will deny their motives , aided by the tabloid - style media and the talk shows , who whip everyone into a frenzy of misinformation , confrontation and mistrust , but you know and I know about their divisive tactics . 
we have seen all this before - in the 1995 referendum campaign and , indeed , even in the last election campaign . 
what we have here , honourable senators , is the Leader of the Opposition and his disciples hitting a hot button or trying to catch one of their famous waves . 
their words are clearly code words to cover their real agenda . 
why , we even have the Leader of the Opposition , Mr. Manning , saying publicly on television , " We are on the side of the angels . " 
where does that put the rest of us , who love this country , respect our institutions and honour our flag ? 
one of their arguments in support of this folly is that they favour freedom of expression . 
what hypocrisy . 
the tactics of the Reform Party as the Official Opposition are reprehensible . 
from the stereotypical racist stunt that they pulled at the door of the Senate , dancing around in sombreros and serving burritos , to this latest episode , their tactics speak volumes about their modus operandi . 
this country urgently needs people who respect each other , who will reach out to each other and make an effort to strengthen our great country from coast to coast to coast . 
i support the decision of the Speaker in the other place . 
just picture what would happen - Canadian and provincial flags , perhaps both , sitting on desks , thrown and waved about . 
it would turn Parliament into the carnival the Reform Party has attempted , with some success , to make of the place . 
shame on them , and double shame on them for trying to paint anyone who disagrees with them as unpatriotic or unCanadian . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
Paralympic Winter Games 
participation of Canadian Athletes in 1998 Games at Nagano , Japan 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I should like to take a moment today to congratulate all of the Canadian athletes who represented our country with such distinction at the Paralympic Games which concluded in Nagano , Japan , last weekend . 
often in the course of our work , we have very interesting opportunities , and for me one of the most special was representing the Canadian government in support of our team in Nagano . 
they had the same skills , courage , determination and heart - and the same weather conditions - but the Paralympians had an extra challenge . 
their challenge was to do it all , sometimes on one ski because of having only one leg , or with one pontoon because of the lack of an arm , or on sit - skis because of the lack of use of both legs or double amputations , or with a guide because of varying degrees of blindness , or , as with the hockey team , all on sledges , providing faster , more exciting games than we often see in the NHL . 
in these Paralympics there were also participants in cross - country skiing events who had intellectual disabilities . 
honourable senators , never did the spirit of the Olympic flame shine as steady and as bright as it did in these games . 
these individuals gloried in competing to the outer limits of their abilities , and sell - out crowds cheered them on at every venue . 
they cheered each other on , with enthusiasm and laughter - and , yes , with flags - and they consoled each other over the rough spots . 
this was sport at its best , but , unfortunately , you did not see or hear much about it . 
it was not the stuff of the newspaper headlines or magazine spreads which accompanied the Olympics , and yet , there could not be more important role models for Canadian children , or adults , whether able - bodied or disabled . 
there will be a chance to see the highlights in a two - hour special to be broadcast by the CBC on March 28 . 
as we watch these men and women demonstrate their abilities , we cannot help but ask ourselves to pull up our own socks and try to do as well . 
in the end , this was the most successful Paralympic games ever for Canada . 
there were 15 medals - one gold , nine silver , including one in hockey , and five bronze - the same total as for the Canadian Olympians . 
the Paralympics were not just about medals . 
every participant was a winner and spread a tremendous image of Canada among the other nations competing , as well as among the tens of thousands of Japanese who offered their support with enthusiasm and great courtesy . 
this is a story , honourable senators , which must be told across this country . 
we in this house have the opportunity to do so in all of the communities we represent . 
i hope we will . 
unemployment in Rural Canada 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I wish to bring to your attention today the growing problem of unemployment in rural Canada . 
while unemployment in urban centres in Canada remains a concern , it is rural Canadians who are feeling the most pain and who have been abandoned , I believe , by this government . 
unfortunately , British Columbia was the only province in Canada which had an increase in unemployment , from 9.3 to 9.7 per cent . 
honourable senators , these numbers do not show the true reality in the province ' s unemployment picture . 
unemployment levels have risen to 11 per cent on Vancouver Island , 12.8 per cent in the Kootenays , and 13.6 per cent in the Cariboo . 
in some smaller towns in rural B.C. , the unemployment levels are nearing 35 and 40 per cent . 
this is in addition to closings and reductions in mills in other places , such as Williams Lake , 100 Mile House and Cranbrook . 
as it is in most parts of rural Canada , the economy of rural British Columbia is linked to its resource sector . 
industries such as agriculture , mining , fisheries , and , most important , forestry are the backbone of the B.C. economy . 
what has this government been doing to help relieve unemployment in rural British Columbia in these sectors ? 
in the fishing industry , they gave us the Mifflin Plan , with lay - offs in the province ' s fishing fleet turning coastal communities into ghost towns . 
for mining , the government , when first elected , promised to work with the province to clear up aboriginal land claims and eliminate delays and uncertainties in the mining industry . 
this has not been done . 
i have risen in this place on numerous occasions to question the government on this issue . 
on the Canada - United States Softwood Lumber Agreement alone , I have risen almost a dozen times without receiving what I believe are concrete answers on what the government plans to do to address this problem . 
meanwhile , Canada ' s softwood lumber market share is going to Russia , Chile and Sweden , to name a few . 
these countries are basically stealing our markets . 
the most horrific aspect , honourable senators , is that the United States now controls our resources as a result of this agreement . 
i have spent most of my life living and working in rural Canada , and I am afraid that future generations will not be able to experience the lifestyle that we now have because I do not believe the government is focusing on the unique problems facing rural Canada . 
honourable senators , when will this government listen to the concerns of rural Canada and address the critical issue of rural unemployment ? 
does this government plan to destroy this rural way of life ? 
i hope not . 
St. Patrick ' s Day 
Felicitations 
hon. Eugene Whelan : 
honourable senators , I rise in the house on this St. Patrick ' s Day to pay tribute to the Irish people of Canada , and of the world . 
my Grandfather Whelan came to New York in 1846 , and proceeded to the town of Amherstburg , then called Fort Malden , in 1851 . 
he was a Whelan who recognized early on the value and importance of settling in Canada . 
he came to Ontario to marry a girl by the name of Murphy , who was already married to a man by the name of Kelly . 
when we review Irish history , we find it one of tragedy and happiness , and one which has made great contributions to the world . 
one of the greatest tragedies that ever happened in Ireland was the potato famine . 
it was at that time that there was a mass migration of Irish people to Canada . 
some historians refer to what took place at that time as an act of genocide . 
the British Prime Minister at that time , Robert Peel , sent a delegation to Ireland to find out what they should do ; the delegation recommended that food be sent . 
parliament voted against the Prime Minister in that respect , and he resigned because he disapproved of what was happening there in Ireland . 
we can see in our own country the results of this tragedy . 
many thousands of those people died , and were buried in Canada . 
we can visit Partridge Island in New Brunswick , or Grosse - Î le in the St. Lawrence , not far from Quebec City , where the quarantine station was , and see there the graves of over 12,000 Irish people . 
honourable colleagues , during my tenure as Minister of Agriculture for Canada , the department had a quarantine station on Grosse - Î le for exotic animals which was near that cemetery . 
the Auditor General once gave me heck for spending money from the departmental funds to take care of the cemetery , which was in a very bad state of repair . 
i remember that we repaired markers , and cut the grass . 
that station now falls under the responsibility of the Minister for Canadian Heritage , the Honourable Sheila Copps . 
it has now been officially declared a heritage site , something that should have happened a long time ago , given the contribution that Irish people made . 
in fact , the contribution that the people of Irish origin have made in building this country is significant , whether it be in industry , in the lumber business , the fishery business or in politics . 
it must mean the luck of the Irish for our three new senators to come to this chamber on such an important day as St. Patrick ' s Day . 
St. Patrick was born in Britain , of Roman stock , around 389 AD . 
as a youth , he was kidnapped . 
i cannot imagine Irish people being kidnappers of anyone , but in any event they kidnapped him and carried him off to Ireland . 
he escaped six years later and fled to Gaul . 
he confronted King Laoghaire at Tara , confounded the druids , and converted the king ' s daughters . 
he is said to have driven all the snakes from Ireland . 
the shamrock , which he used to explain the trinity because of its three leaves , is associated with this day . 
as the new senator from Prince Edward Island may know , one of the Fathers of Confederation was the Honourable Edward Whelan . 
i do not know if he was related to me or not , but my family can claim a little bit of that heritage also . 
just to conclude my remarks , I want to say something about leprechauns . 
some senators on the other side of this chamber may wonder how I ever got elected , looking as I do . 
i want to tell honourable senators that in the first election that I won , in 1962 , to come to the House of Commons as a member , the leprechauns got into the ballot boxes and changed enough " X " s so that I would win the election . 
honourable senators , the Whelans are still making a contribution . 
if you check the history of this country , you will find out one Whelan was elected in 1962 , another was elected in 1993 - our daughter Susan Whelan , and then a senator was appointed to this house in 1996 by the name of Eugene Whelan - the same one who was elected to the House of Commons in 1962 ! 
therefore , as I say , the Whelans are still making a contribution , as are many other Irish people , not only in this country but in the whole world , whether that contribution was to democracy or to the wealth of other people . 
Canadian Flag 
ruling of House of Commons Speaker on Reform Party Initiative 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
i wish to associate myself with what my good friend Senator LeBreton has said concerning the recent events surrounding the flag . 
i wish to be very clear : 
shame and double shame , as Senator LeBreton said , on the Reform Party , for tampering with the most sacred of Canadian symbols : the national anthem and the Canadian flag . 
French Canadians never needed the help of the Reform Party in order to honour the Canadian flag . 
almost 25 years ago , Alexandre Cyr , member of Parliament for Gasp é , made a motion in the House of Commons that the flag be on show in that chamber . 
senators Stollery and Whelan were members of that house at that time . 
believe it or not , that motion received unanimous consent , on February 14 , 1973 . 
the Speaker was somewhat embarrassed ; he could not believe that he had unanimous agreement . 
he asked : " Is it really agreed ? 
really , there is unanimous consent ? " 
wherever I stand , stands the flag of Canada . 
i am proud of this country . 
what the Reform Party is doing is le triomphalisme dangereux . 
to sing O Canada ! , I disagree with that . 
that was on February 14 , 1973 . 
the next day , the Speaker drew the attention of honourable members to the fact the Canadian flag was being displayed in the chamber for the first time . 
that was 25 years ago . 
that is the way to respect the symbol . 
do not put it everywhere . 
it is almost like a clarion parade that they want . 
i think Mr. Charest was right . 
i disagree with that . 
i repeat the same words of my friend Senator LeBreton - shame and double shame . 
i was so angry last night . 
i tried to get a line , all night , to Pamela Wallin . 
she is a great personage , no doubt , but she seems not to know that there are flags in the House of Commons . 
it seems most of these journalists have not noticed that there are two immense Canadian flags , opened up so that we can see them better . 
before , they stood draped as this one right here . 
that is the way to show our respect , not to over do it . 
otherwise you wonder what is going on . 
last night Pamela Wallin interviewed Mr. Fotheringham . 
i could not believe what I heard from such a fine gentlemen . 
today I say , if anyone has a contact , put us on . 
i know about the NDP and , of course , the Bloc I discard . 
i hope the Liberals will not vote for that resolution tonight in the House of Commons to really show that these people are playing with our symbols in Canada at the risk of further destroying this country . 
euthanasia 
dismissal of Murder Charge Against Dr. Nancy Morrison in Halifax , Nova Scotia 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , on Friday , February 27 , 1998 , Judge Hughes Randall of the Halifax Provincial Court dismissed the case of Dr. Nancy Morrison stating that he did not believe that a jury properly instructed would convict her of first degree murder or any crime in relation to the death of Paul Mills on November 10 , 1996 . 
from the outset , this case has been surrounded by controversy . 
Mr. Mills was terminally ill . 
he had already been given the last rites and was suffering intense pain . 
yet on May 6 , 1997 , 60 police officers raided the Health Sciences Centre at Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Halifax and arrested Dr. Morrison - more police than were sent to arrest Paul Bernardo . 
clearly this was overkill and an overreaction on the part of the police . 
the resulting publicity , allegations , and the charge of first - degree murder convicted Dr. Morrison in the court of public opinion long before her case was heard by Judge Randall . 
yet Dr. Morrison must still await a decision from the same Crown prosecutor and police to see if they will continue to prosecute her by way of a preferred indictment , which would , in effect , set aside the judge ' s ruling and send Dr. Morrison to trial on a charge of the Crown ' s choosing . 
by all accounts , Dr. Morrison is an excellent , caring individual and physician . 
her career has in effect been ruined . 
a victim of an abusive process , she has had to resign her intensive care privileges at the hospital . 
even though Judge Randall has dismissed her case , she is still under review by the College of Physicians and Surgeons in Nova Scotia and the Queen Elizabeth Hospital . 
our legal system has failed Dr. Morrison . 
Jocelyn Downie , the director of Dalhousie University ' s Health Law Institute , summed up the dilemma that Dr. Morrison and other physicians face daily when she said in the daily news : 
the dismissal leaves a somewhat confusing message . 
there is a strictly worded provision in the Criminal Code , yet there are instances when it doesn ' t seem to count . 
we are left with no clear guidelines . 
there is a possibility left that law is different in reality than in the book . 
it is most unsettling . 
right now , it ` s like reading tea leaves . 
our esteemed colleague Honourable Senator Dr. Keon has indicated that we need clear legislation and guidelines for the medical profession and patients . 
surely we cannot ignore his request . 
how many other doctors must be subjected to what Dr. Morrison has endured ? 
how many other careers must be ruined before action is taken ? 
judge Randall ' s decision has left a number of moral issues unanswered and they ought to be considered by a chamber such as this . 
where is the dividing line between easing a patient ' s final agony and inducing death ? 
whom did Dr. Morrison hurt given that Mills had received the last rites , was removed from life supports and was dying in extreme distress ? 
how many doctors help patients die every day knowing that they could be charged with murder ? 
doctors cannot be expected to risk their careers to release the terminally ill from their suffering . 
we cannot let the reading of " tea leaves " decide a doctor or patient ' s fate any longer . 
i urge honourable senators to address this matter as expeditiously as possible . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call the next item , I should like to point out that Senator Whelan talked about the " luck of the Irish . " 
today it is combined with the luck of the Senate because both our pages here with us from the House of Commons are called Patrick . 
i would like to introduce to you first Patrick Thompson from North York , Ontario , who is at the University of Ottawa in the Faculty of Social Sciences studying political science . 
on my left , you will forgive my Manitoban pride as I introduce to you Patrick Courcelles from Ste. Agathe , Manitoba . 
you will remember that Ste. Agathe was badly damaged during the 1997 flood . 
i welcome both Patricks to the Senate , on this St. Patrick ' s Day . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
tabled 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the Main Estimates for the fiscal year 1998 - 99 . 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
tabling of Supplementary Estimates ( B ) 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 . 
state of Financial System 
interim Report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee Tabled 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the ninth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce entitled , " Joint and Several Liability and Professional Defendants . " 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Kirby , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 8 , respecting an accord between the Governments of Canada and the Yukon Territory relating to the administration and control of and legislative jurisdiction in respect of oil and gas . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Main Estimates 1998 - 99 , and Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be authorized to examine and report upon : 
the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 , with the exception of Parliament Vote 10 and Privy Council Vote 25 ; and 
the expenditures set out in the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 . 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
notice of Motion to Refer Privy Council Vote 25 to the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on Official languages be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Privy Council Vote 25 of the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
notice of Motion to Refer Vote 10 to the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Parliament Vote 10 of the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , before the vote is called , may I ask the Deputy Leader of the Government what undertaking she is able to give to us on her own behalf as to the adjournment time tomorrow if this motion passes ? 
can a committee chairman safely convene a standing committee meeting for 3:30 tomorrow afternoon , or should I ask for leave to sit while the Senate is sitting ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I can assure you that this side will do everything to ensure that we adjourn shortly after three o ' clock so that any committee meeting may begin as scheduled and as committee notices have indicated . 
senator Murray : 
i do not wish to press this point . 
i am sure my friend will do everything in her power , et cetera , but I note that she used the future tense . 
i should like to have some assurance . 
my friend Senator Bolduc suggests that I request a firm commitment . 
i will ask simply for an assurance that the business of the house for tomorrow has been discussed between the house leaders and that we can expect with some confidence that the Senate will adjourn in time for the committees to meet at 3:30 tomorrow afternoon . 
senator Carstairs : 
that is up to that individual senator . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella , ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
on behalf of this side , I would suggest that we should be able to adjourn at 3:15 tomorrow afternoon , and I shall rise in my place at 3:15 to move the motion to that effect . 
motion agreed to . 
canada - Taiwan Parliamentary Friendship Group 
report of Canadian Delegation to Taiwan Tabled 
hon. Normand Grimard : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian parliamentary delegation to Taiwan , from January 11 to January 17 , 1998 . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Report of Delegation Tabled 
hon. Dan Hays : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian delegation to the sixth annual meeting of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum hosted by the Republic of Korea , which took place from January 7 to January 10 , 1998 . 
Canadian War Museum 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , which was authorized to examine and report upon all matters relating to the future of the Canadian War Museum including , but not restricted to , its structure , budget , name and independence , be empowered to present its final report no later to Tuesday , June 30 , 1998 . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
notion of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , March 18 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders have power to sit Thursday next , March 19 , 1998 , at 2:30 p.m. , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
civil Code of Quebec 
difficulties and Problems Arising from Section 35 - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jacques H é bert : 
honourable senators , I hereby give notice that , on Tuesday next , March 24 , 1998 , I shall call the attention of the Senate to the difficulties and problems arising from section 35 of the new Civil Code of Quebec . 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , March 19 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the legalization of industrial hemp cultivation and to the credit due the Senate for its role in ensuring that hemp will be planted in Canada this year . 
international Francophonie Day 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Fernand Robichaud ( Saint - Louis - de - Kent ) : 
honourable senators , on behalf of Senator Gauthier , I give notice that , on Thursday , March 19 , 1998 , Senator Gauthier will call the attention of the Senate to International Francophonie Day , which will take place on Friday , March 20 , 1998 . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Dan Hays : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , I will draw attention to the Senate of the meeting of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum that took place in Korea from January 7 to January 10 , 1998 . 
question PERIOD 
post - Secondary Education 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate , and it relates to the millennium scholarship . 
the recently announced millennium scholarship plan has certain creative accounting problems and it has other shortcomings as well . 
we need to examine the mechanics of this initiative to make sure it is appropriate for Canada . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham , ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that there have been discussions with respect to harmonization , and I do not know that that would be required . 
however , if it is a stumbling block , I am sure that it has been , or will be , addressed . 
i would be happy to determine for my honourable friend whether that would be an impediment , or indeed something that should be addressed . 
to my knowledge , it is not something that has been considered to the present time . 
it is a valid question , but I am not aware that harmonization is a prerequisite in awarding scholarships . 
senator Oliver : 
what is the government ' s plan should a recipient of the Millennium Scholarship be unable to secure admission to a recognized post - secondary institution in Canada ? 
senator Graham : 
i would think that a prerequisite to awarding a scholarship would be that the person had gained admittance to a recognized university or other post - secondary institution . 
senator Oliver : 
then unless the applicants have proof that they can be admitted to a recognized post - secondary institution , they would not be able to receive a Millennium Scholarship ? 
senator Graham : 
that is important for us to understand , and the honourable senator is asking very valid questions . 
however , the body that will govern and award the scholarships will be at total arm ' s length from the government , and will determine the criteria when it is set up . 
transport 
decision on Relocation of Marine Atlantic Headquarters - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask Senator Graham a follow - up to a question that I have asked on two previous occasions with regard to Marine Atlantic . 
we have received information that the Minister of Transport , the Honourable David Collenette , has decided not to release the decision on the future of the location of Marine Atlantic headquarters until after a certain provincial election in Nova Scotia . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us whether a decision has been made , and if so , if the decision is that the headquarters will remain in Nova Scotia ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that that decision has been made , but as soon as it is I will be happy to alert my honourable friend . 
march 24 will be an interesting night . 
i am sure that all honourable senators will stay up late to hear the results , or perhaps they will not need to stay up too late . 
industry 
possible Crisis in Failure to Adjust Government Computers to Year 2000 
hon. Fernand Roberge : 
honourable senators , one of the most renowned experts on the year 2000 computer glitch appeared last week before the House of Commons Industry Committee . 
Mr. Peter de Jager gave a series of grave warnings that do not augur well for our current efforts to deal with this problem . 
he predicted that the government ' s April 1 , 1999 deadline to fix government computers is insufficient . 
second , is the government considering moving up the date of readiness for the year 2000 computer crisis from the current deadline of April 1 , 1999 ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a very important question . 
i am aware of the testimony that was given by this distinguished gentlemen , and I am also aware that the government is giving consideration to his testimony . 
the suggestion is that the date of April 1 , 1999 be advanced three months to the end of 1998 . It is a valid suggestion which I shall certainly bring to the attention of my colleagues . 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Decision of National Energy Board - Guarantee of Supply to New Brunswick 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , three months ago , after seeing an article in the Halifax Chronicle - Herald , I asked a question concerning the National Energy Board ' s decision to award exploration and export permits for the Sable Island Gas project to an American company , Mobil Oil . 
the December 16 press release confirmed the National Energy Board ' s decision to give the go - ahead to Mobil Oil . 
three months ago , the Minister of Natural Resources announced and confirmed this decision . 
it was announced by agencies , boards and officials . 
can the people of New Brunswick and Canadians expect a decision by the minister in the next few days confirming the board ' s position ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
yes , honourable senators , as discussed on earlier occasions when Senator Simard has raised his concerns , due process was followed and the regulatory bodies in the market - place will do their respective jobs . 
this was the case in the decisions arrived at by the National Energy Board following the recommendations of the review commission . 
senator Simard : 
on December 16 , I tabled a notice of motion to discuss this project . 
i spoke to it on December 17 . 
on December 18 , the Deputy Leader in the Senate , Senator Carstairs , adjourned debate . 
before giving my motion a first - class burial , may I ask the Leader of the Government or his deputy to give us an update on the situation and explain the decision by the National Energy Board and cabinet ? 
Canadians , particularly the people of northern New Brunswick , are entitled to an explanation of the reasons behind the government ' s decision . 
honourable senators , the procedures that were followed were quite normal and very transparent . 
in the interests of getting on with the project , the National Energy Board made its recommendations , and those recommendations were concurred in by the Government of Canada . 
it was also indicated that those who still wished to pursue their bids and apply to the National Energy Board for hearings would be heard . 
prince Edward Island 
possible Appointment of Acadian Senator 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , I have another question on a different topic . 
first , I would like to congratulate and extend a welcome to the three new senators , including the one from Prince Edward Island , Senator Johnstone . 
we know that , at 73 years of age , he will not be sitting in the Senate for long . 
when I visited Prince Edward Island last May , in the fall and even one month ago , I learned that Acadian organizations and Acadians had asked Prime Minister Chr é tien to appoint an Acadian senator . 
i saw letters to this effect . 
i have a suggestion for the Leader of the Government to pass on to Mr. Chr é tien , if he is still there in two years . 
my suggestion , which represents the wishes of Prince Edward Island ' s Acadians , is that he appoint an Acadian senator . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i certainly will bring my honourable friend ' s recommendations and his sensitivity on this question to the attention of the Prime Minister . 
visitor in Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I would call attention to a visitor from the other place in our gallery . 
it is the member for Burlington , Paddy Torsney . 
welcome to the Senate . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
national Finance 
( response to question raised by Hon. Norman K . Atkins on February 10 , 1998 ) 
the Task Force has no plans to issue an interim report prior to the release of its final report . 
the Task Force intends to present a report on the financial services sector to the government in September 1998 . The report will deal with a broad range of policy issues affecting to the Canadian financial services sector , including the government ' s approach to mergers of Schedule I banks , but will not deal with specific transactions ( such as the proposed merger of the Royal Bank and the Bank of Montreal ) . 
the Minister of Finance has indicated that the government will not be in a position to rule on the Royal Bank - Bank of Montreal merger proposal until it has had adequate time for consultation and consideration of the Task Force ' s recommendations . 
prime Minister ' s Office 
appointment of Ethics Counsellor Responsible to Parliament - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Marjory LeBreton on February 18 , 1998 ) 
the Ethics Counsellor envisioned in the Red Book had a narrower focus on lobbying . 
the government expanded that to a much broader range of ethical issues including administering and enforcing the revised Conflict of Interest Code . 
in our Parliamentary system , the ultimate responsibility for the conduct of Ministers rests with the Prime Minister . 
he recommends the appointment of Ministers to the Governor General , and thus has the sole authority to set standards of conduct , consider possible breaches of those standards , and where necessary , take appropriate action . 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 46 
Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
aboriginal Achievement Awards 
fifth Annual Ceremony Held in Toronto 
world Council of Whalers 
the Senate 
tributes to Departing Page - Introduction of New Page 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
first Reading 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
first Reading 
Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Bill 
first Reading 
transport and Communications 
multilateral Agreement on Investment 
notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
federal - Provincial Relations 
visitors in Gallery 
industry 
the Senate 
national Defence 
failure to Proceed with Purchase of Replacement Submarine Fleet - Increased Unemployment Among Dockyard Workers in Maritimes 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Department of Transport - 
the Senate 
vacant Ontario Seat - Notice of Inquiry 
orders OF THE DAY 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Main Estimates 1998 - 99 , And Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
business of the Senate 
the Budget 1998 
thirteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
aboriginal Achievement Awards 
fifth Annual Ceremony Held in Toronto 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , I am very proud today to stand before you to announce that we do have some very positive role models within the aboriginal community . 
it was well borne out at the Fifth Annual National Aboriginal Achievement Awards held on March 12 , 1998 , in Toronto , Ontario . 
the awards have become a Canadian showcase of talent and career achievements of our aboriginal people . 
the National Aboriginal Achievement Foundation has delivered over $ 5 million in education assistance to over 800 aboriginal youth in Canada . 
recipients of the 1998 National Aboriginal Achievement awards are as follows : 
Buffy St. Marie won for lifetime achievement . 
Buffy St. Marie is an aboriginal from Saskatchewan born on the Piapot Reserve . 
she received an Academy Award in 1982 for her song Up Where We Belong from the movie An Officer and a Gentlemen . 
she is a recipient of the Order of Canada and has been voted to the Juno Hall of Fame . 
she has received an honorary Doctorate of Laws from the University of Regina and she is currently teaching art at the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College . 
John Amagoalik won for public service . 
as Chief Commissioner of the Nunavut Implementation Commission , John is responsible for the single greatest restructuring of the Canadian political system since Confederation . 
the creation of the new territory of Nunavut means that a land mass one - third the size of Canada will be governed by aboriginal people . 
chief Abel Bosum won for community development . 
in just ten years , Chief Bosum led the community of the forgotten Cree of the Ouje Bougoumou , who lived in tarpaper shacks , to a community that is a model for the world . 
his community was in despair , forgotten by the James Bay agreement and pushed aside by the forestry and mining operations in their traditional territory . 
guided by their chief , this community secured a land base , raised $ 45 million and built a village that has earned international praise . 
Tantoo Cardinal won for film and television . 
Tantoo is one of the most renowned aboriginal actresses in Canada . 
she was listed on Maclean ' s magazine Honour Role in 1991 . 
she received an Honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from the University of Rochester . 
she is a M é tis . 
raised in Anzac , Alberta , she moved to Edmonton to finish her high school education . 
i am proud to say she is one of my might - as - well - be daughters , as I have guided her a little bit all through the years . 
wade R . Cachagee was the Youth Award recipient . 
this 24 - year - old from Chapleau Cree First Nation established Cree Tech Inc. when he was just 21 . 
he graduated from the Algonquin College with a GIS Technician Diploma , and studied electrical construction and maintenance at Mohawk College . 
he is recognized nationally for using modern technology to enhance and promote aboriginal land use . 
his clients include forestry companies , First Nations , tribal organizations and the Ontario government . 
Joe and Josephine Crowshoe won for heritage and spirituality . 
Joe and Josephine are the last surviving ceremonial elders of the Peigan Nation in Alberta . 
born in southwestern Alberta , Joe was raised in the traditional Peigan culture and was entrusted with the Short Thunder Medicine Bundle . 
Tagak Curley won for business and commerce . 
Mr. Curley is the President of the Nunavut Construction Company , which is building the infrastructure for the Nunavut government . 
he formed a national organization committee of Inuit leaders that became the Inuit Taparisat of Canada and was elected its first president in 1972 . 
Georges Erasmus won for public service . 
this Dene leader became the National Chief of the Assembly of First Nations in 1985 and served until 1991 . 
Georges is a recipient of seven honorary Doctorates of Law and the Order of Canada . 
Dr. Emily Jane Faries won for education . 
she was raised in the northern Ontario community of Moose Factory . 
after earning her Bachelor of Education degree from Laurentian University , she created curricula which balance aboriginal cultural education with the mainstream system . 
currently she is a professor of native studies at the University of Sudbury . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senator , I regret to have to interrupt you , but your three - minute time limit has expired . 
honourable senators , is leave granted to allow the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Chalifoux : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
Dan Goodleaf won for public service . 
he was born on the Kahnawake Mohawk Reserve . 
Mr. Goodleaf earned a Bachelor of Arts in political science . 
he was the first aboriginal deputy minister in a federal government department . 
he is also the first aboriginal person to be an ambassador for Canada . 
in 1995 , he was appointed Canada ' s Ambassador to Costa Rica , Honduras and Nicaragua . 
Roberta Jamieson won for law and justice . 
she is the first aboriginal woman to earn a law degree . 
she graduated from the University of Western Ontario . 
she was the first woman appointed as Ontario ' s Ombudsman . 
she received the Order of Canada in 1984 , and she was recently elected the North American Regional Vice - President of the International Ombudsman Institute in Buenos Aires , Argentina . 
Daphne Odjig won for arts and culture . 
she was born on Manitoulin Island . 
her artwork is shown in museums and galleries . 
she was elected to the Royal Canadian Academy of Art in 1989 . 
Bryan Trottier won for sports . 
he is a Chippewa / Cree M é tis from Val Marie , Saskatchewan . We all know who Bryan Trottier is , a famous former hockey player in the National Hockey League . 
Dr. Cornelia Wieman was also an award recipient . 
she is the first aboriginal woman to become a psychiatrist . 
honourable senators , I am very proud to pay tribute to these fine aboriginal people . 
we do make marks in Canada . 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
i am also concerned about the impact of the activities of the animal rights organizations on people around the world who rely on the coastal resources for their livelihood and renewable resources , such as the sea mammals and the general fisheries . 
it is also with the hope of an alternative to the American legislation , the Marine Mammals Protection Act , which is up for renewal in 1999 , that I present the whalers ' resolution . 
resolution 
whereas , whaling and the sustainable use of whales by peoples around the world contribute significantly to community identity and integrity by satisfying socio - economic , cultural , religious and dietary needs ; 
whereas , high seas whale resources are important natural resources for the benefit of all mankind ; 
whereas , the current majority of members of the International Whaling Commission have failed to meet their legal obligations under the 1946 International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling by : 
a ) maintaining the moratorium on commercial whaling and adopting a sanctuary in the Antarctic Ocean without regard to " scientific findings " as required by the Convention and by 
b ) ignoring the requirement that regulations on whaling " take account of the interests of the consumers of whale products and the whaling industry " ; and 
that these actions have caused severe socio - economic and cultural distress to whaling communities . 
the World Council of Whalers : 
affirms its conviction that the sustainable use of whales is essential for the food security , culture and health of peoples , and that commercial activities related to the sustainable use of whales are appropriate and as such , is acknowledged by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ( Article 25 ) and the International Covenant of Economic , Social and Cultural Rights ( Article 11 ) ; and recognized by the Kyoto Declaration of 1995 regarding food security ; 
2 . Emphasizes that , in accordance with Article 1 of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights and Article 1 of the International Covenant of Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , no people may be deprived of their own means of subsistence ; 
3 . Underscores the consensus of the international community , as reflected in Agenda 21 and the Convention of Biological Diversity , that indigenous peoples and local communities should continue to be sustainable users and stewards of the living resources upon which they have traditionally depended for their livelihood ; 
4 . Concludes that Regional organizations involving resource users are the most appropriate bodies to responsibly manage renewable marine resources and that the use of international institutions or the use or threat of unilateral trade measures to prevent resource users from harvesting whales in a sustainable manner is a violation of universally recognized human rights and fundamental freedoms , as well as a violation of the legal obligations of states under the above noted instruments . 
now THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED : 
that the World Council of Whalers is united in the cause of sustainable use and human rights to natural resource use and committed to continue their cooperation in furthering the objectives of the organization ; 
the Chairman : 
i am sorry to interrupt , Senator Watt , but your three - minute period is substantially over . 
honourable senators , is leave granted for the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Watt : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
2 . That the World Council of Whalers supports the aspirations of those , particularly the Nuu - Chah - Nulth First Nations , Iceland and the small - type whaling communities in Japan , wishing to exercise their rights to sustainably use whales ; 
4 . That the World Council of Whalers encourages its members to ensure that national representation to appropriate international fora includes members of their communities involved in the sustainable use of whales . 
honourable senators , in conclusion , I hope you will appreciate this resolution and share my desire that in this International Year of the Ocean the livelihood needs of the coastal peoples in Canada and elsewhere will be strongly recognized . 
the Senate 
tributes to Departing Page - Introduction of New Page 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in the coming years , he will pursue his studies in political science and communications with the ultimate goal of pursuing a public relations career . 
thank you , Greg , for your good services over the years . 
now , let me introduce you to Michel Th é riault , whom you may have met sometime in the past two years . 
Michel was born in Bouctouche , New Brunswick . 
he is currently enrolled in political science and public administration at the University of Ottawa . 
this is the end of his second year in the Senate page program . 
as you know , he has rather close ties to the Senate , through his grandfather . 
i am very pleased to announce that we have a new position : that of Deputy Chief Page , and the first to occupy that new position is a woman . 
Vicky Wong comes to the Senate from Riverview , New Brunswick . 
she is currently in her third year of studies at the University of Ottawa in human kinetics . 
Vicky is in her second year as a page and will be finishing her year as the Deputy Chief Page . 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , may I rise on a point of privilege ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , but we do not deal with points of privilege until we reach the business of the day . 
senator Cohen : 
then may I make just a short statement ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is there agreement ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Cohen : 
honourable senators , I wish to point out that the three pages whom the Speaker just mentioned are all from the province of New Brunswick , and have done us very proud . 
as a proud New Brunswicker , I say " thank you " to them on behalf of all of us . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 33 , for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the Public Service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1998 . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , March 24 , 1998 . 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 34 , for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the Public Service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1999 . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , March 24 , 1998 . 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 6 , to provide for an integrated system of land and water management in the Mackenzie Valley , to establish certain boards for that purpose and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , March 24 , 1998 . 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I give notice that , on Thursday , March 19 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. on Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 for its examination of Bill C - 17 , an Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
multilateral Agreement on Investment 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , March 25 , I will draw the attention of the Senate to the differences between the proposed Multilateral Agreement on Investment and the NAFTA . 
question PERIOD 
federal - Provincial Relations 
possible Halt to Planned Reduction in Equalization and Cash Transfers to Atlantic Canada - Government Position 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i would like to draw his attention to the fact that , over the years , Atlantic Canadian Liberal governments have quietly accepted the BST , provincial funding of gun registration , closure of military bases , and cuts to UI and ferry services . 
equalization payments to Nova Scotia will fall by a further $ 23 million this year . 
all of this has occurred with hardly any peep of protest from the Atlantic premiers . 
will the Leader of the Government undertake to attempt to stop the planned reduction of equalization payments this year ? 
if he will not , why not ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
however , it is practical to acknowledge that Atlantic Canada has taken more than its share of cuts . 
with 3 per cent of the population , I believe that share would have been something in the order of 13 , 14 , or even 16 per cent of the cuts . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
are you boasting ? 
senator Graham : 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we did not do it . 
senator Graham : 
no , but you increased the deficit to $ 42 billion , and you raised the unemployment rates . 
what this government is doing has brought the finances of this country to a point where they are now balanced . 
we are now in a position to create new jobs . 
we have reduced the unemployment rate from 8.9 per cent to 8.6 per cent . 
honourable senators , I acknowledge that more must be done . 
in all fairness - and Senator Comeau is a fair person - Nova Scotia led the nation with the rate of its employment growth in February . 
in February , 7,400 more people were employed in Nova Scotia than in January . 
that is performance . 
senator Comeau : 
the question about the $ 23 - million cuts in equalization transfers was not answered . 
perhaps the minister could respond on the question of the reduction of cash transfers for health , education and social assistance , which have fallen by $ 209 million since 1993 . 
that circumstance has left the Nova Scotia health care system basically on life support . 
it is dying . 
the government has established a Canada - wide $ 12.5 - billion cash floor for health care , but what is needed is a province - by - province cash floor so that Nova Scotia does not continue to lose this vital cash support . 
would the minister undertake to support a cash floor provision , province by province , which might sustain our health care system in Nova Scotia ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I do not believe there is anything more important to Canadians than the quality of their health care . 
one problem , however - and I am sure that Senator Comeau would recognize this - is that sometimes it is not the amount of money spent but the manner in which the health care delivery system is carried out . 
on Friday night , I had rather an interesting series of meetings in Cape Breton - in Glace Bay , specifically . 
i heard from people who were in serious difficulties because of the high incidence of cancer in that area . 
i have brought back correspondence , which I have given to my colleagues in government , with respect to the serious problems . 
it is something which we must address . 
i was around when Medicare was introduced . 
i had the privilege of travelling from one end of the country to the other with the person who brought in Medicare , one of our former colleagues here , namely , the Honourable Allan J . MacEachen . 
it came into force on July 1 , 1968 - one year after Canada ' s 100 th birthday . 
this government is absolutely committed to quality health care . 
that is why we took up the recommendation of the National Forum on Health to raise the cash floor of the CHST to $ 12.5 billion . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
after lowering it from what ? 
senator Graham : 
this change will see an extra $ 7 billion for health care go to the provinces over the next five years . 
senator Kinsella : 
how much will there be for Nova Scotia ? 
senator Graham : 
we have also taken other measures in the most recent budget that are focused on a better health care system . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is not what the Canadian Medical Association says . 
senator Graham : 
it will be $ 60 million for a new blood agency ; $ 211 million for the National AIDS Strategy - 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
how much for Nova Scotia ? 
senator Graham : - $ 134 million for the Medical Research Council ; $ 125 million for the Caregiver Tax Credit ; and $ 1.7 billion that will go to the Child Tax Benefit . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
for Nova Scotia ? 
senator Graham : 
when you raise the point about transfers and the health care delivery system specifically in Nova Scotia , you know that the Premier of the Province of Nova Scotia has announced that $ 80 million new dollars will be spent on health care in this fiscal year . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
one week before the election ? 
senator Comeau : 
i have one last supplementary question . 
i should like to have an answer to it , if I may . 
the delivery of the $ 7 billion to which the minister refers is based on population . 
if the population of Nova Scotia does not increase , like the more prosperous provinces of Alberta , British Columbia , and so on , those dollars will go to those provinces where the population is increasing . 
in fact , those new dollars will not be coming to Nova Scotia because our population is moving away to those areas where they can find jobs . 
on the question of delivery , the minister might respond to the fact that in Nova Scotia right now , the Premier has installed a two - tiered system of payments for its nurses and health care workers . 
in other words , those who work at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Halifax are paid better benefits than those who work in other parts of the province in which the minister lives . 
if you call that " fairness " in Nova Scotia , I should like to hear your definition of " fairness . " 
senator Graham : 
let me point out - 
senator Comeau : 
not in Nova Scotia . 
senator Graham : 
you say " Not in Nova Scotia , " but $ 212 million was cut from the CHST cash transfers between 1993 and 1994 , and 1998 and 1999 . Tax points grew by $ 87 million and equalization grew by $ 289 million . 
overall , major federal transfers have grown by $ 133 million . 
as I mentioned , $ 12.5 billion , the cash floor , will put back $ 219 million dollars between 1997 - 98 and 2002 - 03 . 
that is for Nova Scotia . Because of the measures taken by this government , Nova Scotia saved about $ 145 million in interest costs over the last three years . 
visitors in Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
welcome to the Senate . 
industry 
future of Cape Breton Development Corporation - Government Position 
hon. John Buchanan : 
honourable senators , first I should like to make a comment , and then I wish to ask a question about Cape Breton . 
i am glad that the Leader of the Government in the Senate has been to Glace Bay and other areas in Cape Breton . 
i just wanted to mention that . 
senator Kinsella : 
you built them and they closed them down ! 
senator Buchanan : 
honourable senators , I do have questions about Cape Breton . 
i believe that the Leader of the Government in the Senate will agree that his heart and soul is in Cape Breton and the mining areas of Cape Breton , as is mine and the heart and soul of other senators here , notably a great senator who made a wonderful speech on Devco yesterday , namely , Senator Murray . 
along with many others , I am very concerned about the future of Devco . 
i have some statistics here that are worrisome . 
they must be equally worrisome to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , Senator Graham . 
the work force at Prince colliery now ranges from 400 to 500 . 
the work force at the Victoria Junction wash plant is down and there is a substantially reduced work force at the coal piers as well as at the Devco shops . 
i and many others , Liberal , NDP and Conservative , have said that Donkin mine is the future of Devco . 
with the work force having been reduced from about 1,800 last year to 800 or 900 this year , we should be considering the Donkin mine much more seriously . 
what is the future of Devco and what is the role of the Donkin mine in ensuring that we will always have Devco ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Buchanan : 
there are 34 . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
you must look at his album more carefully . 
senator Graham : 
i was out by two . 
as the Leader of Opposition says , I should look at his album more closely . 
i have had the privilege of visiting some of those institutions in the company of Senator Buchanan . 
as a matter of fact , when the Special Committee of the Senate on the Cape Breton Development Corporation took its first Devco road trip by bus , quite frequently Senator Buchanan would point out buildings which he had opened and which bore plaques with his name on them . 
i take very seriously what Senator Buchanan has said and what Senator Murray said in the Senate yesterday . 
i recently met separately with management and members of the union . 
i listened very carefully to their concerns . 
i met with many concerned people in Cape Breton with regard to the future of Devco . 
i am perhaps more confident than my honourable friends opposite about the future of Devco , but we must recognize that there are certain geological problems at Phalen mine . 
i can assure all honourable senators that every effort is being made in a very cooperative manner , by both management and the union , to find solutions to those problems . 
with respect to the Donkin mine , as you know , Donkin Resources Limited has an agreement , which has not yet been finalized , to examine the possibility of opening a mine there . 
as my honourable friend also knows , $ 300,000 of federal money was advanced to Donkin Resources Limited to help that company complete and bring up to date the studies which have been carried out over the last 10 to 12 years . 
for the time being , the government has decided to wait to determine where those studies will take Mr. Steve Farrell , his associates , and the mine . 
as all honourable senators know , particularly those who were on the committee , the coal resource in the Donkin reserve belongs to the province , and any lease that would be granted to Donkin Resources Limited would have to be approved by the province first . 
Devco , on the one hand , has said that it would not ask the province to permit it to give a lease to Donkin Resources Limited unless it were satisfied that there was indeed a future for the Donkin mine . 
on the other hand , the Government of Nova Scotia has said that it would not be party to granting a lease to Donkin Resources Limited , or any other company , unless it was satisfied that indeed there was a future for the Donkin mine . 
i wish I could say today that we will begin the opening of Donkin mine tomorrow . 
i wish I could say that the geological problems at Phalen have been solved . 
we must carefully guard against trying to micromanage the Devco mines or any mines on Cape Breton Island from this chamber or from any federal or provincial government level . 
senator Buchanan : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Graham for his answer . 
i have every confidence in Steve Farrell . 
he is a very good mining engineer . 
however , as I and many others have said , the Donkin mine has been studied to death , and that may indeed be the death of the Donkin mine . 
from 1979 to 1981 , a major study was done by mining engineers for Devco , by people from the provincial department , and by people from the Power Corporation led by Dr. Bill Shaw , one of the leading coal geologists in Nova Scotia who knows the Cape Breton coal fields as well if not better than anyone . 
it was determined through that study that the Donkin mine was feasible . 
in the last years , attempts have been made to have that study brought up to date . 
i agree with that goal . 
it should have been completed . 
there must be some reason that it has been held up . 
there is no question that it is not a simple matter , but the geology of the Donkin mine has been proven to be very good . 
the coal in the Donkin seams is low sulphur in the centre and high sulphur in the roof and the floor . 
everyone to whom I have spoken has said that , through selective mining , the good low sulphur coal could be mined . 
that was the purpose of the feasibility studies . 
a year has gone by . 
last year , people from Devco told us that the life expectancy of Phalen was between 12 and 20 years . 
just last fall , they reduced that to a life expectancy of between five and eight years . 
to date , Phalen has been down for most of the year and is just going back with about 300 men . 
the life expectancy of Phalen has been substantially reduced . 
to bring a new Donkin mine on stream will take two and a half to three years . 
by that time Phalen may be closed down , and the Donkin mine may still be in the future . 
w ( 1420 ) 
you know that without the Phalen mine , we have only one mine operating , the Prince colliery . 
at present , there are 400 to 500 men working there , and probably not enough coal is being mined to meet the requirements of the Nova Scotia Power Corporation , at which point they will again start to buy coal from the United States . 
you are absolutely right that the Province of Nova Scotia , by way of legislation - and the mineral resources are owned by the province - must consent to the lease . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am not sure that my honourable friend is being totally accurate when he says that they proceeded without the knowledge of the province . 
i would be surprised if the Province of Nova Scotia did not know that some kind of agreement was being entered into between Devco and Donkin Resources Limited . Devco officials knew with certainty that the province would need to be a third party to any final agreement . 
we can leave that to speculation , but we can ask our friends in the province as to whether or not they were knowledgeable about any such negotiations . 
with respect to the question of why the study has not been completed , my honourable friend is asking the wrong person . 
perhaps we should both be asking Steve Farrell , because Mr. Farrell was given the mandate , the authority and the money to complete that study . 
however , I do not know whether there was any time limitation put on the completion of his study . 
we have heard that Mr. Farrell and his associates have engaged others to do market studies abroad . 
i understand those market studies have been completed . 
we understand that he is also looking for partners . 
the name SNC Lavelin has surfaced . 
apparently there has been some indication of interest on the part of SNC Lavelin . 
senator Murray : 
that was last November . 
senator Graham : 
however , I will certainly endeavour to find some answers . 
let us also be mindful of the fact that very soon Devco will be submitting to the Government of Canada its five - year plan . 
we can look forward to that , I would presume , in a matter of weeks . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to assure you that my comments are in no way a reflection on any senator who asks a question or who answers a question . 
however , I should like to point out that the Question Period is 30 minutes in duration . 
we have now seven minutes left , and to this time there have been only two questioners . 
i have seven on my list . 
senator Buchanan : 
honourable senators , I have one further question . 
there is an old saying - you do not carry coals to Newcastle . 
the incredible thing is that the Nova Scotia Power Corporation has brought in 300,000 tonnes of coal from Hampton Roads in the State of Virginia . 
as the minister knows , over the years we vowed in Cape Breton that there would be no possible way that coal would be brought in from the United States to fire up the boilers of the Nova Scotia Power Corporation . 
yet , now it is happening , to the tune of over 300,000 tonnes . 
if the Phalen mine does not get back to that expected full production , there will be more . 
what is your answer to that , Mr. Minister ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , my answer is only one of regret that the importation of this coal became absolutely essential . 
if there were to be a shortfall , it is a question of whether Nova Scotia Power should be importing the coal , or whether Devco itself should be doing that . 
while I do not have this on official authority , it is obviously in the contract that if there were to be a shortfall , the importation of coal would be the responsibility of Nova Scotia Power . 
the Senate 
delay in Appointment of Senator from Nova Scotia - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , far be it for me to get into this battle of titans from Nova Scotia , but I have a very short question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
he moved very quickly to fill the just vacated Senate seat in British Columbia , while in Nova Scotia the seat has been vacant since January 4 of this year . 
can the Leader of the Government tell us if the Prime Minister is holding up the appointment until after the March 24 Nova Scotia election , before determining who the next senator will be , either John Savage or Russell McLellan ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to assure my honourable friend that the vacancy in Nova Scotia is not being held open for any one particular person or persons . 
there are so many qualified candidates in Nova Scotia that it is very difficult to make a choice . 
let me assure you that there are no shortages of applicants . 
at the same time , it may be that the Leader of the Opposition in Nova Scotia , Dr. John F . Hamm , might be interested in a seat . 
he would be imminently qualified , as would many others . 
it is worthy of note that there is also a vacant seat to be filled in Ontario , and I look forward to receiving Senator LeBreton ' s list of recommendations for that province . 
as well , there is a vacancy still to be filled in the province of Newfoundland . 
senator LeBreton : 
from my past experience , honourable senators , I can attest to the fact that there is probably a very long list . 
if you want my Ontario list , I have about 25 names left over from my previous responsibilities . 
on the question of appointments , can the Leader of the Government in the Senate confirm another rumour going around in Nova Scotia that Heather Robertson , a lawyer and former chief of staff to John Savage , is about to be appointed to the bench of the Nova Scotia Supreme Court ? 
senator Graham : 
certainly not to my knowledge . 
national Defence 
failure to Proceed with Purchase of Replacement Submarine Fleet - Increased Unemployment Among Dockyard Workers in Maritimes 
hon. Eric Arthur Berntson : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i am sure that , as the political minister responsible for Nova Scotia , he will have the answer right at his fingertips . 
he is interested , of course , in the welfare of all good Nova Scotians . 
in light of his desire to keep Nova Scotia as the fastest growing province in the country in terms of job creation , I might tell him that I have been led to understand that around 100 dockyard workers in that province have been laid off . 
these people were submarine maintenance staff working on the Oberon class submarine . 
further , I understand that the Oberon class of submarine is to be mothballed , thus eliminating the jobs of these 100 people . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , yes , I am aware of that unfortunate situation . 
i know also that the government is still considering the purchase of new submarines . 
i understand that that decision is under active consideration at the present time . 
perhaps I was anticipating your supplementary . 
senator Berntson : 
you were anticipating the question . 
had there been any planning , you would have known that the Oberon class should have been mothballed more than just recently . 
this class of submarine has been around for a long time , and does not serve the purpose , from a technological point of view . 
i do not like to be alarmist , but they are also old , and akin to perhaps the Sea King in terms of reliability . 
if there were to be some proper planning , would not it have been wiser to carry through with the Upholder deal , and keep these 100 dockyard workers on submarine maintenance , even while mothballing the old Oberon class ? 
there is no doubt at all that the new submarines will require maintenance as well . 
could it not have been worked a little more synergistically to make it all come together so that these 100 loyal servants of the dockyard were not given their pink slips ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , we are not timing any announcements for any particular event because we are allowing transparency and due process to take place in all our negotiations . 
in a perfect world , of course , there would be better planning . 
it is very regrettable that 100 dock workers face this hardship . 
when you say they are loyal and hard - working , you are absolutely correct . 
i also acknowledge the fact that Senator Berntson , having served in the armed forces in that particular region , would have a special knowledge of what goes on in that area and certainly a sympathy for the workers . 
i can only say that we will do the best we can . 
i will bring my honourable friend ' s representations to the attention of those most responsible . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Department of Transport - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 16 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Halifax Port Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 19 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Department of Intergovernmental Affairs - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 24 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Port of Quebec Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 37 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 45 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Via Rail Canada Inc. - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 51 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
the Senate 
vacant Ontario Seat - Notice of Inquiry 
leave having been given to revert to Notices of Inquiries : 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I am inspired by the reference of the Leader of the Government a few moments ago to the vacancy in Ontario . 
i give notice that on Tuesday next , March 24 , 1998 , I will draw the attention of the Senate to the vacancy in the Senate created by the retirement of the Honourable Richard Doyle of Ontario , to the long - standing tradition of appointing a senior journalist from Ontario to the Senate , and to some helpful suggestions for the Prime Minister in this regard . 
orders OF THE DAY 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Main Estimates 1998 - 99 , And Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be authorized to examine and report upon : 
the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 , with the exception of Parliament Vote 10 and Privy Council Vote 25 ; and 
the expenditures set out in the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Privy Council Vote 25 of the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
vote 10 Referred to the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Parliament Vote 10 of the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
business of the Senate 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this side is most willing at this particular moment to hear first from Senator Bolduc who will be speaking to Inquiry No. 18 . 
he graciously allowed the Senate to adjourn last night before his remarks could be made in order for us to attend the reception on behalf of new senators . 
if there is a general agreement that the house move to Inquiry No. 18 , we would certainly support it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , to proceed to Inquiry No. 18 ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Budget 1998 
statement of Minister of Finance - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Roch Bolduc rose pursuant to notice by the Honourable Senator Stratton on February 25 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the Budget presented by the Minister of Finance in the House of Commons on February 24 , 1998 . 
the minister ' s actions this year seem to have been inspired by President Clinton ' s rhetoric - laden State of the Union addresses . 
president Clinton must be his idol and , like his idol , the minister starts by reminding us of how good the general economic situation has been here , how Canadians have made great effort to overcome the difficulties inherited from his predecessors and how the government has channelled those efforts , and then telling us that those happy results will soon reach us - maybe not this year but soon . 
however , the minister has only shown us the pleasant part of the scenario as it concerns the inflation rate , the interest rates , et cetera . 
these are more relevant in that they compare our situation to that of our competitors , countries whose trade relations are so important to our standard of living . 
governments here account for 48 per cent of gross national product . 
compared to our principal trading partners , our tax burden has increased even more during the past three decades . 
government tax revenues took the equivalent of almost 43 per cent out of the economy in 1995 , with the average family losing 48 per cent of its income to taxes , an increase of 1,200 per cent from 1961 . 
the cost of 100,000 additional rules introduced by governments between 1975 and 1994 are estimated at $ 12,000 per family , for a total of $ 85 billion or about 10 per cent of the GDP . 
debt levels , skyrocketing taxes and the regulatory burden on labour and other factors of production clearly constitute anti - growth policies which are reflected in our productivity levels and , of course , in our standard of living . 
Norway and even Japan , despite its difficulties , are widening the gap between us in this area , while the gap between us and Australia , Sweden , and even Germany with its problems , is shrinking . 
it has been said that when you have been stagnating for a while , you tend to get used to it . 
for example , there is now talk about growth in Montreal . 
it is obvious that they have not visited Atlanta for a number of years ! 
it seems that we are no more competitive today with the 70 - cent dollar than we were when we had a 90 - cent dollar . 
w ( 1440 ) 
we are certainly proud and happy to see the unemployment rate go down a bit . 
however , with the example of Western Europe before us - and for the same reasons , it seems - if we rely on OECD reports , we do not have the courage to apply the remedies that are so well known , and which must be imposed sharply in order to reduce unemployment to a level at least approaching that of our neighbours to the south . 
president Clinton recently said , after citing some positive economic indicators : " These are good times for Americans . " 
i do not believe that the same can be said for Canadians , with our masses of unemployed and our swollen welfare rolls . 
the American president also said in a recent speech - to the applause of Congress - that now that the budget deficit was being wiped out , the priority was to ensure the viability of the social security system . 
in other words , " Social security first . " 
however , as Martin Feldstein demonstrated , " Social security first " really means after tax cuts , and after a new series of announced expenditures . 
no concrete measures were , in fact , proposed by Mr. Clinton . 
meanwhile , in Canada , I can already hear our friends in government retort that here they have solved this problem with the new Canada Pension Plan legislation and its Investment Board . 
i am sorry to have to correct this impression . 
in reality , what has happened here is that , first , a 75 - per - cent premium hike is being imposed . 
all other things being equal , as Keynes would say , this huge hike will kill between 100,000 and 175,000 jobs . 
second , what has also happened here is that $ 100 billion of savings is being picked from the pockets of Canadians . 
the government plans to invest that money in the portfolios of private companies , without even knowing what the consequences of this venture will be on the management of the money . 
third , a huge inequality has been created between generations . 
we will benefit at the expense of our children , whose return on their capital invested in this plan will be minimal , and certainly lower in every case than they could expect from private pension plans . 
let us get back to the recent budget . 
the minister ' s performance , politically , was such that it confused even veteran observers . 
thus , The Globe and Mail ' s Ottawa correspondent said that it was the best budget in a generation - " A political masterpiece . " 
what is more , he said that the minister ' s priorities were in the right place . 
his boss in Toronto took it upon himself to write that " If politics were a mutual fund , Liberals would be Warren Buffet . " 
frankly , I do not understand . 
as in Washington , it must be the " Capital Syndrome " which underlies this completely unjustified marvelling . 
when we in Canada hold what is almost the record in the Western World for taxation and indebtedness , coupled with an unemployment rate that was , until recently , a scandalous 10 per cent or more , and has been almost double that of our southern neighbours for more than a decade ; when we are losing qualified professionals such as British Columbian neurosurgeons to other countries , it seems evident to me that the priority must be lower income taxes and payroll taxes . 
such moves would foster employment , increase productivity and make us competitive once again with our trading partners . 
what did the government announce in its budget this year in relation to this priority ? 
a few small tax cuts for very specific groups , such as parents with adolescent children , and a variety of small subsidies to other groups such as students , researchers , and so on . 
out of $ 100 billion in program spending , this announcement accounts for just a couple of billion dollars , more or less . 
there is absolutely nothing in this budget that provides relief to those who are productive , those who are the most efficient , or those who are investing to create jobs for people who do not have any . 
the minister said that he had killed the deficit , but it is important to know how . 
approximately one - quarter of that deficit reduction came from spending cuts , primarily in transfers to the provinces for health care and education , and from lower debt service charges . 
the other three - quarters came from specific tax hikes , from revenue increases hidden under the magic carpet of non - indexation to inflation of the tax tables , or from revenue increases resulting from economic growth , and from the maintenance of the surtax on those who work the hardest . 
in fact , compared to 1993 , $ 34 billion of additional revenues flowed into government coffers , while spending was cut by just $ 13 billion . 
when the government is collecting $ 150 billion instead of $ 116 billion , it seems pretty obvious that people are paying more taxes . 
the minister was well served by economic growth , but he cannot deny that he also raised taxes . 
here , for the information of Canadians , is a list of forty tax hikes since 1993 , which I should like to table as an appendix to my speech , with the permission of the chamber . 
i would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the President of the Treasury Board on implementing a new expenditure management system , which we worked on in committee . 
it remains to be hoped that parliamentary committees will pay greater attention to accountability , by ensuring that the minister measures program results more accurately . 
honourable senators , out of a budget of $ 145 billion , the President of the Treasury Board only has to decide how to allocate one third . 
the rest consists of statutory expenditures : servicing the debt , old age pension , employment insurance , equalization payments , the Canada social transfer , et cetera . 
it is therefore all the more essential that government spending continue to be examined even more closely . 
the minister seems to think that 195,000 public servants and 11 per cent of GDP in federal programs is a good score . 
he contrasts this with 40 years of profligate spending , which brought us 30 years of repeated deficits , 20 of which were under Liberal governments , and an enormous debt . 
this is not a valid criterion for this unfortunate history , although I recognize that he did better than his former Liberal colleagues . 
i therefore invite the President of the Treasury Board to resume his critical examination of his colleagues ' management . 
in this regard , I thank the Auditor General for the excellent document he has just released on the examination of the Estimates , and I draw your attention , honourable senators , to the table on page 7 , which clearly illustrates the parliamentary system for controlling public spending . 
however , Mr. Desautels , a competent man , is at odds with Mr. Martin , but I tell him to hold his own , because he is right . 
there is no doubt that power changes people . 
who would have said four years ago that the Minister of Finance would be playing with the accounting system , failing to abide by the rules of the Institute of Chartered Accountants and defining what is right and wrong in this professional discipline ? 
he is , for the third time , behaving like a patient who thinks he knows more than his doctor . 
the minister was reminded , and rightly so , of the difference between an expenditure and a future commitment . 
and it applies to scholarships as it did to the innovation fund and to the billion dollars spent on harmonizing the sales taxes in the Maritimes . 
he is even making unrealistic promises such as his child tax benefit for 1999 - 2000 . 
he also looks for turns of phrase that sound like propaganda . 
he seems to be the victim of the image - makers , in the case , for example , of the equal opportunities strategy and the desire for a compassionate society . 
can the minister tell us how equality of opportunity is furthered by taxing workers without diplomas in order to be able to provide scholarships to members of the upper middle class , as he is getting ready to do ? 
how are matters improved by cutting health services , with the resultant use of hospital corridors as emergency rooms , and transferring this money to medical research ? 
frankly , the minister would do better to stick to the findings of his officials , who would undoubtedly identify the real problems , rather than listen to his communications mercenaries , who hold up red herrings and propose solutions that are no better . 
the minister should shed some light on what he is up to with his financial finagling . 
this year , for example , he balanced the budget , by using his $ 870 million for innovation from 1996 , his $ 2.5 billion from 1997 for scholarships that will not be awarded for another two years , and his $ 3 - billion contingency reserve . 
then he tells us that the debt will remain unchanged at $ 583 billion for the next three years . 
who can believe this , when it is known that he was off by 7 per cent in his forecasts for statutory expenditures , an important part of which is based on demographic forecasts . 
if anything can be relied on , it is demographic forecasts . 
yet the minister was off by $ 5 billion in 1997 . 
he tells us that the debt will remain unchanged over the next three years . 
obviously nobody can believe this . 
if he does not want to reduce the debt , it is because he does not want to cut either his spending or his revenues . 
now , 65 per cent of the debt is at a fixed rate , and the Asian crisis is in the process of settling back down . 
i think that the minister is surrounding himself in mystery as a kind of protection against favour - seekers . 
you will note , honourable senators , that I am not following the Reform line of putting a lowered debt as a priority , because the economic growth that is so necessary for more jobs is better assured by a drop in taxes and charges against total payrolls , and because the debt - to - GDP ratio will probably drop to 63 per cent within three years . 
that said , we have just come through a situation that has made the Bank of Canada , and the government I hope , see that outside savings can result in surprises for the financing of our public programs . 
yet the minister is maintaining employment insurance premiums at $ 2.70 , which brings in $ 7 billion , or the equivalent of two GST points to salt away revenues not paid out in benefits . 
he has barely managed to reduce that premium by 10 per cent in three years , when he could have done far better . 
the business sector , whether exporters or financial pundits , was unanimous in its opinion that productivity is affected by our taxation system . 
the Canadian dollar has dropped by 30 per cent in 22 years , and between 1975 and 1996 the productivity of our manufacturing sector was 1.8 per cent compared to the Americans ' 2.8 per cent . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Bolduc , I am sorry to interrupt , but your allocated 15 minutes are up . 
is leave granted for Senator Bolduc to continue his speech , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Bolduc : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
from 1994 to 1997 , the GDP increased by 11 per cent , while personal tax revenues went up 18 per cent . 
so , it is fair to say that the middle class continues to pay dearly . 
as for new expenditures , the government is banking on the symbolic value of a project likely to gain the approval of students and their parents , in this information - based economy . 
however , in Quebec , this initiative has been criticized by everyone , and not just by the PQ . 
this almost unanimous condemnation is reminiscent of what happened when the government closed the military college in St - Jean and is , in my opinion , justified in more ways than one . 
this is not France , where they give the executive branch the power to legislate . 
second , this body will have the authority to develop policies , since it will set criteria regarding the financial needs of students , their merit and their mobility . 
the foundation will thus get involved in the administration of higher education , through the back door . 
in doing so , the government is treating the provinces like mere administrative bodies that will simply have to adjust , as Mr. Pettigrew put it , which is a serious breach of federalism . 
the government ' s decision implies that if it is important , then it is a federal matter , it is our business . 
however , the federal government ' s record in this area is a near total disaster , while that of Quebec is good . 
moreover , is it not obvious to everyone that the administration of social services provided directly to the public should be brought closer to the people being served ? 
as one person put it , this is a demagogic and provocative project . 
another one said that the government was trying to solve the wrong problem . 
this is true . 
furthermore , if we do not take into account medical doctors , dentists and lawyers , who are able to repay their student debts , the debt level falls way below the $ 25,000 to $ 40,000 range in Canada and is even lower in Quebec . 
also , tuition fees in Quebec are half those mentioned in the minister ' s documents . 
with respect to the impact on accessibility , according to J . - Luc Migu é , a senior economist at ENAP , the public administration school in Quebec , it is negligible . 
in fact , the result would likely be a transfer from non - graduates to upper middle - class children , which would result in what sociologists call a perverse effect . 
honourable senators , the Minister of Finance claims to be guided by the following principles : frugality , focus , steadfastness , partnership and fairness . 
in these difficult times for the health sector in particular , is it frugal to spend more and more on making films ? 
i have nothing against the arts and their advancement , but we must put the real world before the world of imagination . 
how does sprinkling new programs around to win over the young square with the principle of focusing our efforts ? 
is it steadfast to cut health transfers in order to provide funding to medical research organizations , as worthy as their work may be ? 
is it a form of partnership to unilaterally establish a national foundation to grant scholarships while disregarding the fact that an efficient student assistance program is already in place in 25 per cent of Canada , in Quebec to be more specific , and denying this province the possibility of opting out ? 
is it equitable to grant scholarships to the upper middle class , who will receive 90 per cent of the available funding ? 
studies have shown that grants and loans do not make any difference for students at that level , so that access to grants is not improved . 
far from it . 
in closing , I again regret that what we have here , honourable senators , is a misguided social democratic philosophical approach , in that false compassion for certain clearly identified interests takes precedence over measures to benefit society as a whole , because these are less cost - effective in gaining votes . 
not everyone agrees , but I am convinced that is where we are headed . 
otherwise , we are condemned to see public spending increase steadily - the famous " tax and spend " vicious circle - and our standard of living decrease compared to that of our world partners . 
take , for example , the medicare case . 
the care of an aging population is the biggest challenge facing Canada ' s medicare . 
within 50 years , the ratio of seniors to workers will more than double . 
just consider that if Canada ' s population today had the proportion of seniors that it will have in less than 50 years , the taxation rate for the average Canadian family would need to increase by between 48 and 95 per cent ; clearly , a non - realistic perspective . 
the Canadian health care system will simply not be able to survive in its present form . 
public budgets for health care , with all the compressions and hurting of the last two years , have declined only marginally , by $ 250 million out of an overall budget of more than $ 65 billion , or less than one half of 1 per cent . 
an economic analysis tends to demonstrate more and more that , when the government grabs more than 30 per cent of GDP , sooner or later economic growth will suffer . 
that is an important message . 
a significant shift in our social policies is therefore the main task incumbent upon Canada ' s governments , if we are to return to the average growth rate that prevailed between 1950 and 1970 , when Canada was a better place than it is now for investment . 
those were good times indeed for Canadians . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Bolduc , I take it that you wish to table a document . 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Stratton , debate adjourned . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
thirteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the thirteenth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( supplementary budget - Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources Committee ) , presented in the Senate on February 26 , 1998 . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
w ( 1500 ) 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
hon. Shirley Maheu , pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders have power to sit at 2:30 p.m. on Thursday next , March 19 , 1998 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
explain . 
senator Maheu : 
honourable senators , pursuant to the order of the house given to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , we were asked to look into not only the absenteeism of Senator Thompson but absenteeism in all its aspects as it affects our rules . 
the committee would like to hold an extra meeting in order to get on with what we are doing and to look at the suggestions given for preliminary opinion to both caucuses . 
senator Kinsella : 
i wonder if the honourable senator would share with us the scheduled time for that committee to meet . 
senator Maheu : 
so far , it has been once a week , on Tuesday when the Senate rises . 
discussion on many of the possible absentee regulations under consideration is getting involved . 
with the permission of honourable senators , we could meet tomorrow . 
i leave it in your hands . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , we must bring this matter to a head . 
chairmen of standing Senate and special committees are seeking almost regularly permission of the Senate to sit in committee while the Senate is in session . 
as some have remarked from time to time , it appears that we have the tail , meaning the committees , wagging the dog , namely the Senate . 
i see Senator Bacon disagreeing and shaking her head . 
perhaps she is right . 
perhaps we should have this open debate as to whether or not committees can sit as a matter of normal practice when the Senate is in session . 
i submit , honourable senators , that it is only on very rare occasions - because of special circumstances , such as the availability of a distinguished expert authority from outside of Canada or a minister , given the nature of a particular bill that is before a committee - that special dispensation might be requested . 
i want to be practical about this , but not doctrinaire . 
so often now , almost as a matter of course , we have requests being made for convenience . 
perhaps there are other good reasons that committees want to meet but at present they are contrary to the rules . 
we are being asked to suspend the rules , and it is not proper unless we make a deliberate decision to change them . 
the reason that the Chair of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has given this afternoon as to why the rules should be suspended to allow the committee to meet while the Senate is sitting does not fall into the category of an extraordinary circumstance , such as a special witness , but rather one of convenience . 
if the schedule of when committees are to meet is inadequate , perhaps we should instruct our staff to review the allotted times . 
it is not a matter that we should take lightly . 
i think we should bring this issue to a head and determine where we are going . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , perhaps I could add a few things . 
i agree completely with Senator Kinsella . 
the principle business of senators should be in the chamber , and we should not have committees sitting simultaneously unless absolutely necessary . 
however , I should like to point out two things which are relevant in this case . 
the attendance policy which is before the Rules Committee was to have been dealt with in an all - day meeting last week . 
unfortunately , there was not a sufficient number of senators in attendance . 
because of the sensitive nature of the matter before the Rules Committee , I felt it was necessary to have good representation by all sides . 
since we did not have good representation from the other side , I recommended that the meeting be cancelled . 
clearly that debate must take place , and we look forward to those recommendations . 
however , I do not think they will get to that matter if they cannot deal with this other item of business . 
under those circumstances and in this one instance , I request the approval of the Senate to allow the Rules Committee to hold a long meeting tomorrow in order to deal with the attendance policy . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , why can the committee not meet on Monday when we are not sitting ? 
i find Senator Kinsella ' s point well taken . 
call the committee for Monday , and we will see that we have the required representation , if that is all that is missing . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , it was moved by the Honourable Senator Maheu , seconded by Honourable Senator Cook , that the - 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , we waive the reading of the motion . 
however , I ask my colleague opposite to highlight , once again , the main arguments for this committee sitting tomorrow while the Senate is sitting . 
i wish to understand the reason exactly . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , the committee has been working very hard to bring to this chamber a fulsome report on attendance policy . 
they met yesterday morning for an extended period of time . 
they would like to meet again tomorrow afternoon for an extended period so that they can bring to this chamber as quickly as possible an attendance policy , as per the instructions of this chamber . 
they then want to get on with their next study , on the concern that both he and I have about the attendance of senators both at committee and in the chamber . 
it is my belief that the primary responsibility of senators is to be present in this chamber when the Senate is sitting . 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , I wish to move the adjournment of the debate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators to adopt the motion ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i hear dissenting voices . 
will those in favour of the motion please say " yea . " 
some Hon. Senators : 
yea . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
will those opposed to the motion please say " nay . " 
some Hon. Senators : 
nay . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in my opinion , the " nays " have it . 
the motion to adjourn the debate is defeated . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 47 
Thursday , March 19 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Honourable Leonard S . Marchand , P . C . 
tributes 
senators STATEMENTS 
freedom of Speech and Parliamentary Propriety 
human Rights 
international Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
national Francophonie Week 
the budget 1998 
clarification of Previous Statement 
human Rights 
racial Discrimination in Justice System in Nova Scotia 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
fourteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
fifteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
adjournment 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
international Summit of Sexually Exploited Children and Youth 
notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
the Budget 
cuts to CHST Payments - Effects on Health Care Delivery System in Nova Scotia - Government Position 
post - Secondary Education 
establishment of Millennium Scholarship Fund - Liaison of Foundation Management with Provinces - Government Position 
uniqueness of Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation - Government Position 
continuing Increase in University Tuition Fees - Government Position 
increases in University Tuition Fees - Representation by Quebec Students to Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs - Government Response 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Secretary of State for Parks - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Science , Research and Development - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
orders OF THE DAY 
depository Bills and Notes Bill 
third Reading 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
excise Tax Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
Canadian War Museum 
report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Adopted 
the Budget 1998 
statement of Minister of Finance - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
visitor in the Gallery 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
Canadian War Museum 
social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
the SENATE 
Thursday , March 19 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Honourable Leonard S . Marchand , P . C . 
tributes 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , someone once said that to accomplish great things we must not only act but also dream , not only dream but also believe . 
when Len Marchand arrived in Ottawa in June 1968 as Canada ' s first aboriginal MP , he had just beaten the indomitable Davie Fulton in the British Columbia riding of Kamloops - Cariboo . 
in his first speech to the House of Commons , he spoke about the frustrations and the despair of our First Nations . 
he also spoke about hope - hope for a proud peoples which had lost belief in themselves . 
he said that his people must begin to understand that they could become whatever they wished and that they could aspire to become whatever they were capable of becoming . 
canada ' s first aboriginal MP spoke of a country which had never before made the attempt to ascertain the fate of a peoples which had lost their past . 
his was a historic voice and a cause for much reflection because he raised questions about equity and tolerance , about racism and injustice , about a country which was a symbol to the world of hope and compassion - a country where , with respect to our founding First Nations , the one - eyed man had surely become king . 
Canadians began to recognize , as this new voice of our First Nations spoke out in the highest legislative body of the land , that something very vital and essential to the national soul had been lost to us . 
is heaven more beautiful than the country of the muskox in summer , when sometimes the mist blows over the lakes , and sometimes the water is blue , and the loons cry very often ? 
that expression from the Saltatha Inuit was , in a way , the personification of secrets which only our First Nations truly understood . 
they had paddled the wilderness waters and knew the pain of the portage . 
they knew the treeless lands and the unspoiled rivers . 
they were the key to a vital part of our identity . 
they were part of our special bond with the vast distances , the adventure , the solitude and the mystery of our great Canadian wilderness and the Canadian psyche itself . 
our society has changed a lot in the three decades since Len Marchand was elected . 
he has been a strong catalyst in affecting that change . 
he served as parliamentary secretary to our present Prime Minister when Mr. Chr é tien was Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development and went on to become Minister of State for Small Business . 
on his appointment to the Senate , he served as chairman and deputy chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples and worked with great dedication and perseverance as chairman of the Special Committee for Aboriginal Electoral Reform . 
before he came to Parliament , he authored several scientific publications which were widely recognized , ranging from " An Ecological Study of Sagebrush in the Interior " to " Native Vegetation and Soils of some Grasslands at Different Elevations in the Province of British Columbia . " 
Len Marchand was an active member of the North American Indian Brotherhood and the Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs . 
in recognition of his support to the enhancement of their society , Senator Marchand was named Honorary Chief of the Okanagans , and Honorary Patron of the Native Arts Foundation . 
over the last few years , he has worked closely with the Shuswap Band of his province , helping to bring a large development project to fruition . 
perhaps closest to his heart has been his tireless dedication to fund - raising efforts for an aboriginal war memorial , a symbol of many things - a symbol of brave warriors who fought and died for freedom but who did not themselves have the most basic entitlement of a free society , the right to cast a ballot , the right to vote , the most basic right of citizenship . 
senator Marchand , through his presence over three decades on the national stage , has done what he set out to do . 
he has brought the voice of Canada ' s First Nations to centre stage . 
in so doing , he has taught all of us about a country which sometimes lost touch with a vital part of its national identity , and he has taught us about the meaning of hope and belief in the lives of a proud people as they struggle for release from the inequities of the past . 
most of all , he has been a symbol of the important truth that to aspire to great things in the future , our aboriginal peoples must not only act but dream , must not only dream but believe , because the great reality of all things Canadian is that the real soul of our country will only be returned to us by the First Nations , who hold the key . 
senator Marchand has asked me personally to recognize and thank all his colleagues , whom he will miss very much , for their long years of collaboration and friendship . 
he also wanted to be remembered , with deep warmth and gratitude , to the many people who serve this chamber and this institution with skill and dedication . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish Senator Marchand , his wife , Donna , and all the members of their family many years of good health and happiness in retirement . 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , it is a true honour for me to rise today to pay tribute to a great British Columbian and great Canadian , none other than Leonard Stephen Marchand . 
senator Graham pointed out that he beat Davie Fulton . 
i do not think anyone ever really beat Davie Fulton or ever really beat Len Marchand . 
they were just resting and making the position available to each other . 
i would like to believe that anyway , on the part of both these gentlemen . 
senator Marchand ' s career in public service can best be described as ground - breaking . 
senator Marchand was , for the lack of a better phrase , a pioneer in Canadian politics . 
he first got involved in politics in 1965 as a political assistant . 
at that time , I understand , he was the only political assistant of aboriginal heritage working in Ottawa . 
later , in 1968 , he was elected to the House of Commons as the member for Kamloops - Cariboo . 
he was the first status Indian to be elected to the House of Commons and he went on to be re - elected twice . 
senator Marchand ' s career has profoundly affected the level of involvement of his people in the Canadian political system . 
his work , along with that of some other colleagues in this place , such as Senator Watt , Senator Adams and now Senator Chalifoux , demonstrates the importance and necessity of the contribution of our aboriginal Canadians and what a difference they can make in Canada ' s political system . 
many times when people are sent to Ottawa to represent their constituents , they end up representing Ottawa to their constituents . 
this , honourable senators , cannot be said about Senator Marchand . 
in fact , during his tenure , Senator Marchand had a dual responsibility , not only to represent the people of Kamloops and that area but also aboriginal Canadians from across Canada . 
honourable senators , Senator Marchand did so with great dignity , pride and honour . 
while Senator Marchand and I may not have agreed on all issues , I do know that he always put the interests of his people and his constituents above all else . 
i have great respect for his integrity . 
as well , I never believed that these differences that we had led to anything aggressive or were really a personal confrontation . 
we just had too much in common to allow small items to interfere with larger ones . 
when hunting elephants , we were never side - tracked by rabbit tracks . 
we have already heard from Senator Graham about all the important work he has done on behalf of his people . 
i would like to highlight not only Len Marchand ' s sensitivity to his people but his sensitivity to the region he represented . 
it is very difficult to get the concerns of British Columbians heard in Ottawa - especially those of rural British Columbians . 
over his 30 years in public life , Len Marchand has been a very effective voice in bringing the issues of rural British Columbia to the attention of those in power . 
he has been equally effective in effecting change that has been to the benefit of these same people . 
i do not believe that most Canadians , the media and even some senators have a full understanding of how difficult and taxing travelling between British Columbia and Ottawa can be on the human body . 
jet lag is an ongoing state . 
senator Marchand had been doing this for nearly 30 years , at the expense of his health and his family . 
sometimes when those of us from British Columbia - or " Lotus Land " - are suffering from jet lag , our sanity is questioned . 
i always say that people like Len and the rest of us from Lotus Land have so much inner peace , coming from such a great place , that it is hard for the rest of the world to understand what we are talking about . 
while Senator Marchand ' s work as a member of the Senate of Canada may be done , I know he will continue to work on behalf of his people . 
recently , he has been involved , as Senator Graham pointed out , in a very important project , that of creating a monument to honour aboriginal veterans . 
i trust and hope that he will continue to provide his abilities , leadership and time to our country . 
in closing , I can only say to his replacement , Senator Fitzpatrick , you , sir , have large moccasins to fill . 
hon. Dan Hays : 
honourable senators , I should like to join in paying tribute to a friend , Len Marchand , with whom I was sworn in when I came to this chamber . 
Len Marchand is a great storyteller . 
i am sure we have all shared in Len ' s stories . 
however , I cannot think of a single one of his stories that I could repeat here today . 
he had an incredible , earthy sense of humour that always hit on the point and he did it in a way that I shall always remember , even though I will not be able to repeat in places such as this . 
i would also like to remember Len as Len the scientist . 
he had undergraduate and graduate degrees in agriculture , and must be one of the world ' s experts on Artemisia tridentata . 
senator Graham mentioned his expertise on sage brush ; for all I know , they are the same thing . 
in conclusion , I pay tribute to Len and Donna as parents . 
i hope that our paths will cross again soon . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , Canadians are often exhorted by leaders to ponder , and ponder yet again , two adjectives , " unique " or " distinct , " that form such a tantalizing part of our current political lexicon , and which have now become embedded in the hieroglyphics of Canada . 
one could certainly apply those adjectives to our retiring senator and great friend , the Honourable Leonard Marchand . 
think of Len as the first status Indian to graduate from his public high school , and the first status Indian to serve as a ministerial assistant in Ottawa . 
he was the first status Indian to become a member of Parliament , a parliamentary secretary and a minister of the Crown . 
think of Len rising from those modest origins to become the Honorary Chief of the Okanagan tribe . 
think what a unique and distinct blend of concentration , capability and courage it took to make that astonishing rise upwards . 
i first met Len when I became a member of a small group in Ottawa I like to call the " Class of 1965 . " 
i joined other young Canadians who flocked to Ottawa to serve in the Pearson government as ministerial assistants . 
in fact , as I look around the chamber , I reflect on the fact that Senators Austin , Pitfield , Joyal , De Ban é , Bosa and our recently appointed senator from British Columbia , Ross Fitzpatrick , all served in that so - called Class of 1965 . 
we came from all parts of Canada , all walks of life , from different backgrounds , all bound by one common cause : to serve as proficiently and proudly as we could under Mr. Pearson ' s banner . 
Len was a distinct and unique member of that unique and distinct class . 
Len worked first for the Honourable J . R . Nicholson and then the Honourable Arthur Laing , both Ministers of Indian Affairs . 
both ministers were powerful and shrewd political regional barons from British Columbia in the Pearson government . 
Len came to Ottawa and quickly gained a reputation as a fast study in the corridors of power . 
as young ministerial assistants , we met often to discuss public and partisan business . 
Len was always quick , quiet , ambitious , articulate , incisive and judicious in all questions of political and policy matters and , most important , the political plans necessary to execute those ideas . 
he was also a great and calculated wit , as Senator Hays pointed out . 
though small in stature , Len possessed a quality rare in politicians : a vast storehouse of common sense that he would summon to each and every question that he addressed . 
few of us could appreciate or understand then the incredible hurdles - both physical and personal - that Len overcame to climb the political ladder . 
in Parliament , Len led on all issues related to the aboriginal community , where he remains a recognized and respected leader . 
as with the Okanagan tribe , he was always peaceful and productive . 
he spoke rarely in Parliament or the caucuses , but when he did , he cut to the quick of the problem with authority and precision . 
we watched Len rise above his modest origins and his tribal community to serve a higher loyalty , the sometimes unfashionable loyalty to Queen and country . 
for Len was - and is - first and foremost a Canadian . 
honourable senators , may this not then be Len ' s lasting lesson to his tribal community and to his country . 
beware , senators , for the Okanagan shaman can be a potent adversary against those who would divide the spirit and the body . 
for me , Len ' s life serves as a living idea of Canada . 
canada , like poetry , so organizes the fragments of ideas into a provoking , if imperfect , work in progress that we would know not what we have until there is a danger in the losing of it . 
Len , as you return to private life and what we all hope will take you along the path to a healthier and happier hunting ground , may wind and water , fire and earth , sun and stars always be with you and yours . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have known and deeply admired Senator Len Marchand since we first met following his election as a member of Parliament in 1968 . 
it has been an honour to have worked with him , both here in this chamber and within the Liberal Party where we worked together to establish the Liberal Party ' s Aboriginal Commission . 
we also worked together in this chamber where he chaired and I was a member of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
his pride and heritage ; his lifelong struggle on behalf of his people ' s rights and opportunities ; his present work in raising funds for the National Aboriginal Memorial , all epitomize a man who has given all that he has to the cause of his people . 
i will miss him in this chamber ; however , I will not forget what I have learned from him . 
i have not walked in his moccasins , but he helped me to empathize with the pain . 
for that , I am deeply grateful . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
senator Marchand ' s contribution to Parliament and to Canada , and the understanding that he brought to other people about the problems and opportunities of aboriginal Canadians cannot possibly be overemphasized . 
he was , as others have said , a first . 
senator Marchand was the first aboriginal cabinet minister . 
he helped our party to establish the first Aboriginal Commission - and a first , I think , in any political party - and he certainly was a founding member of that movement within the Liberal Party of Canada . 
before I became a senator , Len Marchand , along with Senator Watt and Senator Adams had been working for a long time to have the interests of the aboriginal people of this country focused upon by this a committee of this chamber , a committee which would oversee their progress and highlight their concerns that are so important , whether in British Columbia or any other province in Canada . 
oddly enough , honourable senators , the formation of that standing committee was a long , tough haul . 
senator Marchand never gave up . 
i think it fitting that he should have had the opportunity to be the chairman of that committee . 
beyond all that , Len Marchand is a close friend . 
he has a sense of humour that I often reflected was one of his most outstanding qualities , because he maintained it in spite of the pain and the difficulty that surrounding the cause that he has and always will support . 
we have lost , in this chamber , through Len ' s early retirement , not only a friend but a powerful and compassionate spokesperson for the native peoples of Canada . 
i know he will never cease serving . 
i will miss him a great deal . 
i wish him , Donna and their family the very best . 
i wish him good health . 
i could not possibly walk in the moccasins of Len Marchand , but he did a great deal to teach me how to walk in moccasins . 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , I served in the political process of this country with Len Marchand . 
we worked together as assistants to a minister . 
he got himself elected to Parliament ; I went in a different direction at that stage . 
he served as a minister , as I did at a different time . 
we both served in this chamber . 
i can do little more than summarize Len Marchand ' s career . 
he served with great honour and integrity , and with great effectiveness . 
i count him as a friend and a colleague , and I wish him well . 
i certainly do not count him out of dabbling in our affairs in the weeks to come . 
senators STATEMENTS 
freedom of Speech and Parliamentary Propriety 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , after the shameful display of using the Canadian flag as a symbol of their excessive immersion in self - righteous patriotism , the leader of the Reform Party and his seat - mate are now maliciously telling Canadians that appointments to this place have a price tag . 
the following quotations are taken from the House of Commons Hansard : 
does this not leave the impression that Senate seats are for sale ? 
the public ... is left with the impression that Senate seats are for sale . 
was it a downpayment on a seat in the Senate ? 
air Canada , Canadian Airlines and the Prime Minister all seem to offer seat sales ... 
this deal has all the appearances of the exchange of a business favour for a political favour . 
unfounded smears and fallacious allegations aimed at its members , however , are completely unacceptable . 
the least one can hope for , however , is that they stop doing damage to reputations on the basis of innuendo and insinuation and get back to the business of the country . 
if they persist , however , they will agree to be identified with the late United States Senator Joseph McCarthy , the master of political witch - hunting in the early 1950 s . 
while the leader of the Reform Party may take this as a compliment , he should remember that Senator McCarthy ' s excessive hounding of innocent fellow citizens was such that he was eventually censured and sacked by a triple - E Senate . 
human Rights 
international Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , on Saturday , March 21 , we mark the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination . 
this year it will be a special observation , given that it takes place within the year of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
the International Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and Protection of Minorities grew out of the Universal Declaration . 
i am sure all members of this house will take note of the day and underscore the importance of that value which is key and core to our many Canadian values . 
racism has no place in this society . 
national Francophonie Week 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , this week we are celebrating National Francophonie Week and , tomorrow , March 20 , a number of activities will be held to mark International Francophonie Week . 
i would like today to give you several examples of what the francophone community means in various parts of Canada . 
i must limit myself in my examples for lack of time . 
the word francophone suggests to me words like generosity , necessity , diversity and vitality . 
and this vitality may be found among the over 53,000 francophones in Alberta . 
this community is continually growing , economically solid , highly organized and structured in a way that allows Alberta francophones to feel at home in Edmonton , Calgary or even Lac La Biche . 
the perseverance and dynamism of these francophones have enabled them to establish French school boards , thereby assuring the community of a French education right up to university . 
thanks to the attentive ear of the government , some francophone MPs and a number of francophile representatives , Franco - Albertans hope to have health services provided in French soon . 
on the other side of the Rockies , in British Columbia , francophones have been a presence since the Mackenzie expedition in 1793 . 
in 1850 , in B.C. , 60 per cent of the population of European origin spoke French . 
francophones were responsible for the first hospital , the first convent and the first newspaper in British Columbia . 
legal proceedings have forced the provincial government to establish French school boards . 
however , francophones in British Columbia must continually struggle against the classic statement by their government : " There are not enough of you . " 
on the Atlantic Coast , the 2,500 Newfoundland francophones cheered Premier Brian Tobin ' s commitment to provide them with the same quality of education as the majority following the education reform in Newfoundland . 
but this Canadian Francophonie is also a reality . 
despite the gains made across the country , the francophone community has had to deal with failure at times , too . 
people in some parts , such as Miramichi , are still having to fight for health services in French . 
canada allows this majority to keep its separate identity , and this majority allows Canada to continue to extend its influence . 
writer Antonine Maillet compares this Francophonie to a symphony . 
that is how I see it , too . 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , as our colleague Senator Losier - Cool so eloquently pointed out , tomorrow marks the Journ é e internationale de la Francophonie in Canada and in all countries of the international French - speaking community . 
la Francophonie is part and parcel of Canada ' s foreign policy and enables all Canadians to benefit from this openness to the world and the cordial relations we have established with French - speaking nations on all continents . 
la Francophonie also gives us an opportunity to reveal to the rest of the world the unique traits of the Canadian personality . 
as one of the most active members of this multilateral assembly , we will continue to support the fundamental values shared by Canadians , such as democracy , human rights , and especially the rights of women and children . 
i call on all senators in this Chamber to join with me in wishing all French - speaking Canadians a wonderful Journ é e internationale de la Francophonie tomorrow , March 20 . 
the budget 1998 
clarification of Previous Statement 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I implied yesterday that the government ' s forecasting errors stemmed from errors with respect to statutory expenditures . 
this is still true regarding the seven per cent , except that I said that the difference stemmed , in large part , from erroneous demographic forecasts . 
this is inaccurate . 
the Standing Committee on National Finance was informed this morning that this was in fact the result of the very safe cushion used by the Minister of Finance when measuring interest rates over the next 18 months . 
i therefore wish to correct this part of my speech . 
human Rights 
racial Discrimination in Justice System in Nova Scotia 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I rise today to make a brief comment on two separate but distinct reports that have been brought to my attention that deal with issues of racial discrimination within the justice system of Nova Scotia . 
the first is a report entitled " Pursuing the Law : the experience and perceptions of African , East Indian and Caucasian Canadians in becoming lawyers and in practice in Nova Scotia . " This report highlights the extent to which racism and bigotry infect the justice system in Nova Scotia . 
prepared for the Nova Scotia Barristers Society , this report reflects the conclusions of the 1989 Royal Commission on the Donald Marshall Jr. Prosecution , namely , that Black and Mi ' Kmaq Nova Scotians have been denied justice and prevented from realizing their full potential because of racism that is pervasive throughout society in general and in the legal system in particular . 
nine years after that royal commission report released its findings , it is clear that little has changed . 
in 1989 , the Marshall inquiry reported there were no Mi ' Kmaq lawyers in the province . 
in 1997 this situation remains unchanged . 
this study shows that visible minority lawyers earn substantially less than their white counterparts . 
of those surveyed , visible minorities reported that they were employed by smaller firms . 
none of the visible minorities surveyed worked for a medium or large firm of 11 lawyers or more . 
this report also comments that : 
the behaviour of judges is increasingly held up to public scrutiny , particularly when sexist or racist pronouncements suggest that certain judges are seriously out of touch with current attitudes . 
the second matter brought to my attention from the Nova Scotia Barristers Society proves that they did not ignore this report . 
they have not allowed it to gather dust on some bookshelf . 
instead , they have responded positively by hiring an equity officer . 
not only is this a first for Nova Scotia , but they are the first law society in Canada to do so . 
the Nova Scotia Barristers Society is taking a brave new step forward . 
the society has also announced an exciting new initiative called " The African Canadian and Aboriginal Student Mentorship Program . " 
this program has four goals : to increase the number of African Canadian and aboriginal lawyers practising in Nova Scotia ; to provide law firms the opportunity to benefit from exposure to and the work produced by African Canadian and aboriginal students ; to provide African Canadian and aboriginal law students the opportunity to benefit from discussions with practising lawyers ; and finally , to provide law firms with a pool of highly competitive graduates . 
early indications are that the program has been well received and that it is off to a good start . 
i commend the Nova Scotia Barristers Society for taking this vital first step towards correcting 200 years of injustice . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
fourteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report 
Thursday , March 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
fourteenth REPORT 
your Committee has examined and approved the budget presented to it by the Standing Committees on Agriculture and Forestry for the proposed expenditures of the said Committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 : 
professional and Special Services $ 30,000 
transport and Communications 146,594 
all Other Expenditures 6,500 
total $ 183,394 
respectfully submitted , 
WILLIAM ROMPKEY 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Rompkey : 
with leave , now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( g ) , report adopted . 
fifteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , March 19 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
fifteenth REPORT 
your Committee has examined and approved the budget presented to it by the Standing Committees on Agriculture and Forestry for the proposed expenditures of the said Committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 : 
professional and Special Services $ 18,400 
transport and Communications 13,049 
all Other Expenditures 5,500 
total $ 36,949 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Rompkey : 
with leave , now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( g ) , report adopted . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until next Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 , at two o ' clock in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 21 , to amend the Small Business Loans Act . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Wednesday next , March 25 , 1998 . 
international Summit of Sexually Exploited Children and Youth 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Landon Pearson : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , March 26 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the results of the International Summit of Sexually Exploited Children and Youth , held in Victoria from March 7 to March 12 . 
question PERIOD 
the Budget 
cuts to CHST Payments - Effects on Health Care Delivery System in Nova Scotia - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
there are reports of families waiting eight hours to have a child examined at a Halifax hospital . 
in another instance , Alice Penny , who was in hospital being treated for pneumonia , had to leave hospital and return home to care for her husband , who had twice been refused admission to hospital while he was suffering from pneumonia and elevated blood sugar levels due to diabetes . 
what specific relief does the latest budget offer to the health care system in Nova Scotia ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as my honourable friend would know - because he would have examined the budget very carefully - 40 per cent of the new spending in the budget is for increased transfers to the provinces , specifically with respect to health care delivery services . 
as I mentioned yesterday , the provincial government has announced that it will increase spending in health care delivery services during the fiscal year by the sum of $ 80 million . 
if you look at the overall transfers , including the CHST and transfer payments to the provinces , they amount to a net increase for the province of Nova Scotia of some $ 133 million . 
senator Oliver : 
could the honourable senator comment on what I understand to be the facts , namely , that over the next four years Nova Scotia will receive $ 8 million less in the cash portion of the CHST in 2001 than it did in 1997 - 98 ? 
does the minister support Nova Scotia receiving less money for health care and education over the next four years ? 
if not , how did he and the Premier of Nova Scotia allow this to happen ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , as he has demonstrated on many occasions , the Honourable Senator Oliver is a student of fiscal matters . 
however , one must take the picture in totality and look at the various aspects of the transfers . 
it is true that the cash transfers are down , but one must also look at the tax point transfers , which are up . 
the total CHST transfers are down , but the equalization payments are up . 
post - Secondary Education 
establishment of Millennium Scholarship Fund - Liaison of Foundation Management with Provinces - Government Position 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , the recent budget announced the Millennium Scholarship Program . 
as we start to understand how this program is being developed , we will be asking many questions of the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i should like to start with one today . 
as one who did not pursue a university education because of the obstacles which existed at that time - and I was looking at this possibility in the fifties , when the financial obstacles were great - I know of the tremendous challenges faced by students trying to finance a post - secondary education . 
in this regard , it is my opinion that the spirit of the millennium scholarship initiative is laudable . 
as outlined in the 1998 budget , the federal government will manage and administer the funds through an arm ' s length body called the Canada Millennium Fund Foundation . 
this agency will decide how to design and deliver the scholarships , as well as determine the number and value of scholarships to be awarded to each applicant . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate to what extent this foundation will liaise with the provinces and post - secondary institutions in order to determine the most efficient manner in which to bestow awards ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator has pointed out that the foundation will be an arm ' s length body with no direct ties to the federal government . 
it will be managed by a board of directors composed of citizens . 
senator Di Nino : 
liberals ? 
senator Graham : 
i beg your pardon ? 
senator Di Nino : 
liberal citizens ? 
senator Graham : 
i did not say " Liberals . " 
if the honourable senators wants to assume that all sound - and good - thinking Canadians are Liberals , that is his option . 
i have been assured that the board of directors will include a good cross - section of people representing the various disciplines in our country . 
the government has been providing scholarships directly to students right across Canada for about 20 years now through its granting councils . 
i can think of the Medical Research Council , the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the Social Science and the Humanities Research Council , to mention just a few . 
i anticipate that there will be continuing consultation with the provinces and with the provincial ministers of education to ensure that the taxpayers of Canada will receive full benefit for the dollars that are spent in one of the most imaginative and positive programs that has ever been introduced for young people in our country . 
uniqueness of Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation - Government Position 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
that takes a lot imagination ! 
duplication of services is a costly and unnecessary financial burden on Canadian taxpayers . 
will the minister explain to us what special function this foundation serves which could not be provided by provinces and institutions already in place ? 
in other words , what unique service does the federally appointed board provide that is not already available through the provinces or other concerned institutions ? 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
good question ! 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Oliver is correct . 
it is an extremely good question . 
the Government of Canada wants to ensure that all students who are qualified will have an opportunity to receive these scholarships . 
it will not be left to provincial governments alone to decide who the beneficiaries will be . 
the foundation itself will help to bring down the financial barriers that are preventing some young Canadians from pursuing higher education , and certainly will increase opportunities for Canadians . 
we recognize that education comes under provincial jurisdiction , and that curricula , institutions and teaching quality are the responsibility of the provincial governments , but there is nothing to prevent the Government of Canada from sharing the benefits of being Canadian with young Canadians who aspire to improve their lot in life . 
senator Di Nino : 
did I understand the leader to say that the foundation will be mandated to consult widely with the provincial bodies as well as educational institutions ? 
if that is so , is it correct to say that this government is willing to consult with Canadians before acting unilaterally ? 
senator Graham : 
the answer is a very positive yes . 
continuing Increase in University Tuition Fees - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask a further question regarding education funding for students . 
is the Leader of the Government in the Senate aware that tuition fees have risen by 43 per cent since his government took office ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
that must be in Manitoba . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
they have risen 100 per cent in Manitoba , with a Tory government . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am aware that tuition fees have risen across the country . 
as to the specific numbers in various provinces , I would leave it to my honourable friend to explain to us further if he has the specific numbers , and I would be happy to respond if a response is appropriate . 
senator Stratton : 
what does this millennium fund do for those students who are leaving universities today with debt that is the equivalent of a mortgage on a house , except that they do not get the house ? 
senator Graham : 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
why is it in the budget , then ? 
senator Graham : 
i think the Government of Canada should be congratulated for its imagination , and for taking this kind of initiative . 
i am sure my honourable friends opposite only wish they had thought of it when they were in office . 
increases in University Tuition Fees - Representation by Quebec Students to Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs - Government Response 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , as a supplementary to the scholarships question , has the government taken note of the quite serious representations that were made , as recently as yesterday , to the Honourable St é phane Dion by students at the Universit é de Montr é al ? 
they pointed out to Mr. Dion that while tuition fees are always a problem , they are less of a problem in Quebec than they are in other provinces of Canada . 
they therefore argued that the available moneys could be put to better use by the provincial government and by the universities to ensure a better quality of education for the students who are there . 
what is the reply of the government to those representations ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is the view of the government that it should provide these moneys , these scholarships , these benefits , these opportunities , directly to the students , in response to the hundreds - indeed thousands - of requests that have been made by the young people of this country . 
senator Murray : 
surely the minister will agree that the situations are different , on the word of the students themselves . 
as we have heard today , tuition fees are obviously a serious problem in some provinces , but a less serious problem in Quebec where , the students say , the money could be put to better use in the hands of the universities themselves . 
senator Graham : 
the government has been granting scholarships directly to Quebec graduate students , as my honourable friend would know , through the granting councils , and has been doing so since as far back as 1917 . 
senator Murray : 
what has that to do with it ? 
senator Graham : 
Quebec graduate students and university - based researchers receive about one - quarter to one - third of all funding for scholarships and grants from granting councils , depending upon the council . 
this is not something new . 
it is something that has been done on a continuing basis . 
the millennium scholarship is new , and should be given on an equal basis , with equal opportunities for students , no matter where they live in Canada . 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
the Leader of the Government speaks to us of the Canadian millennium scholarships . 
that is not what we are talking about ; we are talking about the system of student bursaries . 
it seems to me that we have had a system in Quebec since 1966 which works very well . 
this system allocates part of its funds to bursaries and part to loans , according to which the students want . 
the students are satisfied and they pay back their loans . 
what more could anyone want ? 
it seems to me that this is a totally different system than in the other provinces . 
what the students want is for the government to hand over the money and put it where the most pressing needs are . 
the government cannot claim that the students are against anything suggested to them . 
i cannot understand the comments by the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I guess it is a matter of a difference of opinion between some honourable senators and others , and those who have devised the funds . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Secretary of State for Parks - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 43 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Science , Research and Development - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 53 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
orders OF THE DAY 
depository Bills and Notes Bill 
third Reading 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
this year , 1998 , is very special year for the Yukon . 
you will recall that the Klondike Gold Rush took place exactly 100 years ago , in 1898 . 
at the time it was the largest Canadian city west of Winnipeg . 
the lure of gold was astounding . 
the gold , incidentally , was discovered by George Carmack , his Indian wife , Kate , and her brothers , Skookum Jim and Tagish Charley , all from the Carcross - Tagish area near Whitehorse . 
i take this opportunity to invite all senators and their families to visit the Yukon during our centennial year . 
you will be well received and certainly will enjoy our great territory . 
i am extremely pleased to speak in support of this legislation which moves forward the devolution process taking place in the Yukon . 
bill C - 8 provides for the transfer of the administration and control of on - shore oil and gas resources from the federal government to the Yukon government . 
it will also grant the territorial government the authority to legislate in regard to those resources . 
i know honourable senators will want to join me in supporting and applauding the territorial government ' s ambition to take on these new provincial - type responsibilities . 
the exercise of these functions and powers will become increasingly important as new oil and gas developments proceed in the Yukon . 
in other words , the time has come that decisions for Yukoners be made in Whitehorse , not in Ottawa . 
the Government of Canada supports efforts to place responsibility for northern issues where it belongs , at the local level . 
that is why the devolution of all remaining provincial - type powers and programs to the Yukon government continue to be a priority . 
however , the process of transferring responsibilities is far from complete . 
the federal government still manages Crown lands , forestry , water , and is responsible for the management of environmental issues , mines and minerals , and , of course , oil and gas . 
for Yukoners , the transfer of responsibility for natural resources is key to their political evolution . 
Yukoners recognize that resource development will form the basis of a strong and robust territorial economy in the 21 st century . 
the Yukon territorial government has said that now is an appropriate time to begin to assume responsibility for administering and controlling natural resources . 
the Government of Canada is in agreement and supports the devolution of administration and control of oil and gas to Yukon . 
let me take a moment to explain what the transfer of oil and gas will mean to Yukon and its economy . 
the Yukon ' s oil and gas resources are largely untapped , but not because of a lack of interest . 
uncertainty over land and resource ownership has deterred development in Yukon for more than 20 years . 
this is changing . 
the passing of the land claims legislation in 1994 , our ongoing negotiations with Yukon First Nations , and the finalization of the remaining land claims in the near future will set the basis for a renewal of oil and gas activities . 
on the date of the transfer , the federal government will pay to the Yukon the moneys it has collected in petroleum revenues from on - shore Yukon . 
once the transfer is complete , Yukon will receive the annual revenues from the Kotaneelee project , approximately $ 1.5 million per year . 
these revenues will be shared with the six Yukon First Nations that have land claim agreements in effect . 
once the transfer of responsibility and funding is completed , the federal government will no longer be directly involved in managing on - shore oil and gas resources in Yukon . 
it will be done at the territorial level . 
however , the offshore areas will continue to be under the jurisdiction of the federal government , and the federal regime will continue to apply . 
territorial legislation will be passed to establish a new regime for managing and regulating oil and gas activities . 
this legislation will address exploration , development , conservation , environmental and safety issues , as well as a collection of resource revenues . 
the replacement of federal legislation by territorial legislation will take place simultaneously with the transfer of administration of oil and gas . 
the Yukon territorial government has offered its unqualified support for Bill C - 8 . 
this is viewed as a landmark bill in the territory because it will give Yukoners the authority to establish their own oil and gas regime and to collect revenues from oil and gas development . 
in addition , Yukon has determined the pace for change , and it has said that now is the right time for it to take control over administering its oil and gas resources . 
Yukon First Nations also support this bill . 
once implemented , the legislation will provide stable , predictable revenue to Yukon First Nations with signed land claims agreements which will help to nurture their autonomy and economic independence . 
in effect , this bill also helps the government to meet its objectives under " Gathering Strength , Canada ' s Aboriginal Action Plan . " 
one of Gathering Strength ' s objectives is strong support for communities , people , and economies . 
by providing oil and gas revenues to the Yukon First Nations with signed land claims agreements , Bill C - 8 helps us bring real and practical improvements to communities . 
Yukon First Nations and the Yukon government are presently working cooperatively to develop a common oil and gas regime for Yukon , and we should applaud their efforts . 
this is a historic development that bodes well for future development in Yukon and for further devolution of powers to Yukon . 
this degree of cooperation has evolved from the years of consultations that both federal and Yukon governments have undertaken in order to develop the oil and gas transfer proposal and this bill . 
the bill is also supported by industry . 
bill C - 8 will contribute to certainty , predictability , and a stable environment , which will help attract new projects and business to the region . 
existing oil and gas rights , titles and interests will be protected and will not be diminished by the new regime . 
given the wide support of this important initiative , I urge honourable senators to join me in supporting this bill . 
passage of this bill will send a strong message of respect and confidence to all Yukoners . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I have a question . 
i do not want to speak to the substance of the bill . 
i am in support of it generally . 
i look forward to some of the comments that will be made during the study of the bill in committee . 
senator Lucier expressed an interest in seeing all of us come to the Yukon . 
he extended an invitation for us to visit . 
the invitation is gratefully acknowledged . 
as long as he is paying the bills , we will all come . 
i am not sure the honourable senator can answer my question , but let me put it on the record anyway . 
why does it cost me so much to visit the marvellous , beautiful land of Northern Canada , whether east or west ? 
i can fly Europe or the U.S.A. for a fraction of the cost to go and visit the honourable senator and all the other friends we have in the Yukon . 
perhaps he can share with us some thoughts or express some frustrations of his own on this issue . 
senator Lucier : 
first , the honourable senator is invited , and we would like to see him come up there . 
i know he has already been there and has friends in the Yukon . 
my temptation is to say that the costs are so high because of the GST , but I will not say that . 
i will say that it is a frustration that , as you can well imagine , is shared by people of the Yukon . 
for the people of the Yukon who must come out a certain number of times per year to do business , the plane fares really are scary . 
from Whitehorse to Vancouver alone , I believe the fare is around $ 1,000 for one person . 
we hope you will find a way to overcome this problem and come and visit us in the Yukon . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , on behalf of Senator Spivak , debate adjourned . 
excise Tax Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to rise today to participate in the debate on second reading of Bill S - 10 , to amend the Excise Tax Act . 
this is Senator Di Nino ' s private member ' s bill . 
this bill is short and , I might add , to the point . 
my comments will be equally so . 
the bill seeks to amend Schedule VI of the Excise Tax Act by adding : 
a supply of any book , periodical literature or other reading material . 
the effect of the passage of this bill would be to exclude all reading material from the application of the Goods and Services Tax . 
let me state from the very beginning that I support the principle of this bill . 
as a former teacher , I could not do otherwise and still hold up my head in meetings with other teachers . 
however , I would like to raise a matter which I hope the committee will study . 
i am concerned about the definition of " reading material . " 
what exactly would be encompassed by this bill ? 
for instance , most books are good and valuable . 
i for one would be very loath to censor any book , periodical or reading material . 
however , the GST is placed on many items and I would personally object to the removal of the GST on pornographic books , for example , while at the same time leaving the GST on disposable diapers . 
i would also object to the removal of the GST from Playboy or Playgirl magazines while leaving it on children ' s puzzles which I know to be essential for reading readiness . 
recently , in this chamber , both Senators Tkachuk and Kinsella raised questions of privilege when tables were published on the Internet by the Department of Finance concerning the changes to the CPP which had not yet been approved by this chamber and without a proper disclaimer to that effect . 
they were correct in their concern . 
it was quite wrong for a government department to place this item on the Internet without acknowledging that Parliament had not yet approved the changes . 
however , honourable senators , that raises a most interesting question . 
are all of the materials that we now have on our computers and on the Internet , reading materials ? 
would the meaning of reading material in this bill include , for example , computer programs ? 
two years ago , I was delighted to visit a school in Senator Adam ' s area of Rankin Inlet . 
i walked into the classroom and all the little seven or eight year olds , were working on a computer program . 
they were all learning to read in English , and not from the so - called " printed " material but from a computer program . 
i would like the committee to consider the question of exactly how broad is this exemption and what would be the revenue implications if " reading material " was given the widest possible definition ? 
honourable senators , as a former teacher , I cannot undervalue the importance of learning to read . 
reading opens a whole world of opportunities for people of all socio - economic classes . 
we want to encourage our children to read . 
we have always wondered if it was because she insisted , at the age of two , on sleeping with her books in her crib . 
she seemed to take great delight in annoying her parents when something was missing from the pile . 
we knew this child did not know how to read at the age of two , but she clearly had some sense of perception and if all of the books were not there , there was quite a squeal until they were produced . 
she was not a TV watcher . 
she still is not . 
conversely , it was not an easy task to introduce my youngest daughter to the process of learning how to read . 
it is important that all children be exposed to a love of literature at a very young age . 
i look forward to the deliberations of this committee . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if the Honourable Senator Di Nino speaks now , his speech will have the effect of closing debate on the second reading of this bill . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Di Nino , bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the consideration of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , tabled in the Senate on December 16 , 1997 . 
hon. Catherine Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to offer my comments on the report of the Special Committee on Post - Secondary Education . 
my first comments are direct to the members of the committee and the staff who assisted them in drafting the report . 
they are to be commended for the important work they did in exploring a topic of national interest and importance . 
the report is another example of how this house can bring deeper understanding to public issues . 
i would congratulate the committee for presenting a carefully thought out document and for submitting some urgent and practical recommendations . 
before I proceed further , I would pay tribute to Lorne Bonnell , the architect of this report , who recently retired from the upper chamber after a long and distinguished career as a medical doctor and parliamentarian . 
i have known Dr. Bonnell for close to 30 years . 
the zeal with which he undertakes projects is clearly evident in this timely and vital document . 
in the preface , he writes that the future of any nation lies in the education of its youth and the lifetime learning of its citizens . 
it is a wise observation , for we need only look to the state of higher education today to get a preview of our country ' s competitive strength two and three decades hence . 
this is why this report stands out in importance , and why its recommendations deserve our attention . 
since the report was published , the government has demonstrated its commitment to education for young Canadians and others who need mid - career upgrading and retraining . 
as the new budget specified , the $ 2.5 billion Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation will be augmented by other education - related initiatives . 
they include tax relief for interest on student loans , tax - free RRSP withdrawals for lifetime learning , and the Canada Education Savings Grant that provides initiatives to save for a child ' s education . 
our predecessors understood the value of learning , and they pioneered our universities . 
particularly in the last 50 years , we have seen a tremendous development in the post - secondary sector . 
there has been an explosion in the number of colleges and universities , and those institutions have demonstrated the ability to adapt to new circumstances and to meet new challenges . 
the President of McGill University , Dr. Robert Shapiro , said last year : 
the capacity of Canada ' s universities to reinvent themselves over time is quite stunning . 
the President of York University , Dr. Lorna Marsden , has remarked : 
we have now invented - 
- in Canada - 
- a type of university that combines the ancient traditions of learning with the preparation of Canadians for the community and the labour market . 
we do both , and we do them both well . 
good , accessible , higher education is one of the things that makes Canada Canada . 
it is no accident that a nation with such a strong network of post - secondary schools offers a quality of life that ranks among the best in the world . 
the two go hand in hand . 
our rate of participation in higher education is the best of the OECD nations . 
forty - six per cent of Canadians between the ages of 25 and 64 now have some post - secondary education . 
two million people will pursue some form of study this year . 
however , faculties and administrations are facing pressing problems - funding cuts , shrinking staff , buildings in need of repair , and less money for libraries and research - but universities have initiated measures to cope with limited resources . 
honourable senators , I know that some may say education is not a federal matter , that it is a provincial one . 
however , try telling that to students . 
try looking into the faces of young people who want to learn but who are worried about whether they can afford to . 
try telling them their problems are not our jurisdiction . 
i do not think that is the approach we want to take . 
providing our citizens with the education they need to enter the economic mainstream must be a shared national goal . 
never in the history of this country has education been so important , and never have we faced the situation that we face today . 
if we fail to act , for the first time we may begin producing generations of Canadians who are less well - educated than the previous generations . 
this is not acceptable . 
the great test of a nation is the kind of children it leaves to the world . 
surely we want our youth of today to be the best educated generation that we have ever produced . 
we cannot settle for less . 
let me turn to some of the recommendations in the report . 
there are two areas which tie all the others together : accessibility and quality . 
one of the turning points in many people ' s lives comes when they pursue higher education . 
being from Atlantic Canada , I am proud to say that young people from my region are choosing to continue their studies beyond high school in greater numbers than ever before . 
a survey for the Maritime Provinces Higher Education Commission found that 82 per cent of last year ' s high school graduates plan to continue their education . 
just 10 years ago , only 13 per cent of young people in the Maritimes were enrolled at university . 
today , that number has doubled . 
do not misunderstand me : 
i do not think this is the time for a spending binge , but it is time to consider some careful investments in areas that are crucial to our economic success . 
someone once said : " Education costs money ... but , then , so does ignorance . " 
that is why I was pleased to hear of the Prime Minister ' s Millennium Scholarship Fund . 
the fund will not just award academic achievement , but will assist moderate - and low - income Canadians to attend college and university . 
along with other budget initiatives I mentioned at the outset , education is being given the prominence it deserves , and what better way to start a new century ! 
a Senate committee , to its credit , has put forward other ideas to ease the debt burden on students . 
among the ideas are tax incentives for work study programs ; special grants for students with high needs ; accepting community service as partial repayment for student loans . 
i have no hesitation in supporting these proposals . 
honourable senators , I am pleased that the committee mentioned the value of international education , a subject of particular interest to Prince Edward Island . 
having had the privilege of taking part in two Team Canada missions , I know some of the exciting opportunities that exist overseas for Canadian universities . 
prince Edward Island has made some important strides in this regard . 
in the last five years , the number of foreign students at the Atlantic Veterinarian College in Charlottetown has grown steadily . 
today , nearly one in five vet . college students in Prince Edward Island comes from a foreign country . 
last year , our university established a centre for international education to place university graduates from across Canada in teaching positions overseas . 
our technical college , Holland College , exports educational programs . 
there are colleges in China that are using a special learning model pioneered at Holland College . 
i wish to commend the committee for advocating a new national effort for more involvement in all aspects of international education . 
there are tremendous benefits to be gained , both culturally and economically . 
honourable senators , in conclusion , let me refer to something the Prime Minister said in a speech last year , and I quote : 
one of the most important things that - 
- we - 
- must do is to equip Canadians to compete in a changing world . 
a highly educated workforce is the single best guarantee of Canada ' s prosperity in the next century . 
we can take pride in the kind of higher education system this country has produced . 
we owe a debt of gratitude to the people who have made it one of our great achievements . 
in some other countries , higher education is limited to the rich and the brilliant . 
not in Canada . 
it is a hallmark of our network of post - secondary schools that education is accessible to average families all across the country . 
again , honourable senators , I believe that commitment is here to stay with the advent of Budget 1998 , the " education budget " from the Minister of Finance , Paul Martin . 
higher education is a stepping stone for about 100,000 fresh students who arrive on our campuses every year . 
they are our future . 
in short , advanced learning is a precious resource that , in the words of Dr. Lorne Bonnell , will " keep our country among the world ' s leading nations . " 
as parliamentarians , we must commit ourselves to ensuring that Canada ' s higher education system prevails at the pinnacle of excellence . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Forest , debate adjourned . 
Canadian War Museum 
report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology ( budget - study on the future of the Canadian War Museum ) , presented in the Senate on February 25 , 1998 . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , this is a modest budget by the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs , enabling them to complete their work on the Canadian War Museum . 
the work is virtually completed , but they do not exclude the possibility of having some further hearings and , of course , the report still must be prepared . 
i commend this modest budget to the support of colleagues . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
the Budget 1998 
statement of Minister of Finance - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Stratton calling the attention of the Senate to the Budget presented by the Minister of Finance in the House of Commons on February 24 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Stratton ) . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak in response to the budget presented by the Honourable Paul Martin on February 24 , 1998 . 
first , I should like to congratulate the minister on achieving a balanced budget . 
that is quite an achievement . 
it could not have happened without the actions of two of his predecessors , Michael Wilson and Don Mazankowski . 
it was these two ministers who started Canada down the road to fiscal responsibility . 
had it not been for them , Paul Martin would not have been able to achieve his balanced budget . 
much has been said in a negative way about the previous government , but it was that government which laid out the path that the current Liberal government is following . 
the courage and conviction of Brian Mulroney and his MPs will be remembered . 
it was much like the turning of a huge oil tanker at sea , altering the attitudes of Canadians so that they realized that dramatic changes needed to take place in their expectations of just what government is able to do . 
now , much like the Liberal caucus on the other side , I should like to put forward to the Finance Minister my options for inclusion in his next budget . 
first , it would appear from reports that the government is literally awash in money , with cash flow far exceeding expectations , to the degree that even the gurus at the Department of Finance cannot explain . 
higher revenues account for at least three - quarters of the drop in the deficit between 1993 and 1997 . 
a good chunk of the remainder is the result of passing on the deficit problem to the books of the provinces through cuts in some cash transfers - hardly something for the government to brag about . 
the front cover headline of Canadian Business magazine of March 27 is : " Give Us A Break - Why the Heat ' s on Paul Martin for Big Tax Cuts . " 
the article itself goes on to state : 
Martin has benefited from some huge strokes of luck . 
he inherited remarkably low inflation and interest rates thanks to the inflation - fighting battles waged at tremendous political cost by Bank of Canada Governor John Crow and the Conservative government . 
that is not me who is saying that ; that is someone else saying that . 
the article continues : 
the article goes on about the future , and states : 
the darkest cloud is outlined in a remarkable document issued last year by Industry Canada , the federal government department that monitors this country ' s international competitiveness . 
entitled " Keeping Up With The Joneses , " the report paints a grim picture of the productivity gap between Canada and the U.S. The most shocking piece of information is that Americans enjoy a living standard approximately 25 per cent better than Canadians , as measured by real personal income per capita . 
honourable senators , that gap continues to widen . 
why ? 
i will try to tell you . 
the average Canadian family pays more in personal income taxes than it pays for shelter , food or transportation combined . 
clearly , this is a significant burden , even before you begin to include sales and property taxes . 
if you do include everything that is paid to government , hidden and direct , the average worker works until June to meet the demands of all three levels of government . 
real incomes are standing still . 
after taxes and inflation , Canadians have less money in their pockets today than in 1993 . Putting more money back into the pockets of Canadians would help to restore that lost purchasing power . 
our tax rates are hopelessly out of line with those of our American neighbours . 
i wish to suggest to Minister Martin that one way to do that would be to increase the basic personal exemption to $ 10,000 , as has been suggested by my Progressive Conservative colleagues in the other place . 
this would translate into an effective tax cut in the range of about $ 800 to $ 900 per taxpayer . 
it simply does not make sense to tax Canadians earning less than $ 10,000 a year , and such a measure would eliminate this inequity . 
the government should use the next budget as an opportunity to restore full inflation indexing to the tax system . 
honourable senators , the small amount of tax relief that was offered in this budget may very well be an illusion as it simply restores for some Canadians what would have been lost to inflation this year . 
during the debate on Canada Pension Plan reforms in both Houses of Parliament , we argued that rising CPP premiums must at least be offset with cuts in other taxes in general , and employment insurance premiums in particular . 
from time to time , the government tells us that payroll taxes are a problem . 
in February of 1994 , the Finance Minister told us , as he brought down his first budget , that " payroll taxes are a barrier to jobs . " 
his context was an overhaul of the unemployment insurance system that was supposed to result in lower premiums - not a huge premium surplus , but lower premiums . 
pick a colour , any colour . 
there was also the " purple book , " " A New Framework for Economic Policy , " telling us , in the fall of 1994 , that a payroll tax " raises unemployment relative to the situation in which there is no tax or a lower tax . " 
on the eve of his 1997 budget , Paul Martin told a CBC town hall meeting that , " there is no doubt that when payroll taxes rise , that could have an effect on jobs . " 
honourable senators , the 1998 budget will keep EI premiums high until at least the year 2000 . 
employees this year and next will pay over $ 2.70 for every $ 100 of their insurable earnings . 
there will be , at the end of fiscal 1998 , an $ 18 - billion surplus in EI - an $ 18 billion surplus and a 25 - per - cent deficit in our productivity compared to the United States . 
second , whatever happened to the Liberal support for medicare ? 
to quote Susan Riley of The Ottawa Citizen in her article on March 11 : 
for a group eager to re - establish its Liberal credentials after years of punishing restraint , the Chr é tien Liberals appear strangely indifferent , even hostile , these days to the sensitive issue of health care . 
in media reports across the country over the last few months there have been countless articles reporting on the extreme conditions in our hospitals , particularly in our emergency wards , and this from a relatively mild outbreak of the A - Sidney flu virus . 
cash transfers to the provinces for health , welfare and education have been cut by $ 6.3 billion since 1993 , of which $ 261 million was cut from Manitoba . 
CHST cuts have had a dramatic consequence for breast screening facilities in Canada , as another example . 
a recent federal government study found that half of the 338 clinics tested did not meet some American standards . 
since the survey data was coded , the clinics , as well as the patients , do not know which facilities are substandard . 
breast screening facilities are not regulated by federal quality standards . 
i quote from The Ottawa Citizen of March 11 , 1998 : 
in the Commons this week , Prime Minister Jean Chr é tien has been responding to questions about deteriorating hospital service , crowded emergency wards and exhausted nurses by listing the mostly minor health initiatives contained in last month ' s budget . 
these include the claim that the federal government has put an additional $ 1.5 billion into transfer payments to the provinces , when , in fact , all it did was cancel a proposed cut . 
despite the Prime Minister ' s and the Finance Minister ' s assertions that the provinces are to blame for the current hospital crisis which threatens the nation ' s health care system , the federal government has done little to offer guidance or assistance . 
instead , it has chosen to focus its energies on show case initiatives such as the Millennium Scholarship Fund . 
the recent waves of horror stories emerging from hospitals across Canada in regard to budget shortfalls prompted a tersely worded statement from Dr. Victor Dirnfield , President of the Canadian Medical Association . 
he said in a press release dated March 2 , 1998 : 
the government has ignored Canadians who believe that access to quality health care is fundamental . 
by not listening and by not reinvesting in a health care system in dire need , the Prime Minister and the federal cabinet have missed the opportunity to address the growing anxiety of Canadians . 
waiting to reinvest in health care in future budgets , as Finance Minister Martin has suggested , is just not good enough . 
the crisis exists today and must be addressed immediately . 
an article in Time magazine dated February 23 , 1998 tells the tale of recent events in Hong Kong , and this should hit home . 
the article outlines in detail the events that occurred , resulting in the slaughter of about 1.4 million chickens , ducks , pheasants , quail , and other foul kept for human consumption ; a slaughter that may have prevented a pandemic similar to that which occurred in 1918 when 20 million people died from influenza . 
i do not intend to be a predictor of gloom and doom , but the article goes on to say that the scientific community is waiting for the next pandemic , which they say is overdue . 
honourable senators , imagine what we are in for . 
they are predicting 60 million deaths should this occur . 
how can we expect to cope with such an outbreak if our hospitals cannot cope with the current situation ? 
i know that the role of the federal government is to provide vision and direction in consultation with the provinces as described in the current issue review on health care policy dated September 1997 , prepared by Nancy Miller Chenier . 
finally , I should like the Minister of Finance to look at his much cherished Millennium Scholarship Fund . 
the Liberals have been accused of using the $ 2.5 billion as a way to stir federalism in Quebec . 
Mr. Charest is noted in The Toronto Sun on February 26 , 1998 as stating : 
what he - 
- " he " being the PM - 
- is saying is he ' s ready to use the issue of student loans as a political football . 
in his desire to become immortalized as the " education PM " Mr. Chr é tien has substantially weakened the bedrock of effective federalism . 
to quote The Globe and Mail of February 26 : 
the $ 2.5 billion Canadian Millennium Scholarship Foundation announced in Tuesday ' s budget amounts to the rape of federalism . 
it is also politically egocentric , administratively inept and strategically stupid . 
hon. John G . Bryden : 
who said that ? 
senator Stratton : 
the Globe and Mail . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
the distinguished Mr. Thorsell . 
senator Stratton : 
to quote Saskatchewan ' s Finance Minister , Eric Cline : 
when you look at the Millennium Scholarship Fund - which is aptly named since it doesn ' t benefit anyone until the next century - I would estimate Saskatchewan will receive approximately $ 10 million a year for students . 
Cline noted that Saskatchewan now receives about $ 40 million to $ 50 million less in post - secondary education grants than it did when the Chr é tien government assumed power in 1993 . 
the Finance Minister ' s millennium fund will help students starting in the millennium but what of the student of today ? 
the student of today has responded by saying the minister has cut transfers to the provinces for education and , as a result , the provinces have been forced to raise tuition fees by 43 per cent . 
students are now leaving school with what amounts to a mortgage , in effect , a mortgage on their future . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Stratton , I regret to inform you that your 15 - minute period has expired . 
senator Stratton : 
may I have leave to continue ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
Yes. 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Stratton : 
No. 
senator Gigant è s : 
then leave is not granted . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
you are the best argument for the retirement age we have ever seen . 
senator Gigant è s : 
you started it . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they should reduce it to 74 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
leave is not granted . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , it is my pleasure , on behalf of Senator Stratton , to finish his speech . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I believe this was a motion by Honourable Senator Stratton . 
he was speaking in closing . 
senator Di Nino : 
i am the next speaker on the same subject . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
he has never spoken . 
this was his first speech . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
did he not speak when he introduced the motion ? 
senator Carstairs : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
very well . 
senator Di Nino : 
the students ' response is that the minister has cut transfer payments to the provinces for education and , as a result , the provinces have been forced to raise tuition fees by 43 per cent . 
students are now leaving school with what amounts to a mortgage - and they do not even get a house to own . 
tell me , where has he left them and could he not help them directly in his next budget ? 
senator Bryden : 
honourable senators , I have a point of order . 
senator Di Nino : 
i will close in about 12 seconds . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Bryden on a point of order . 
senator Bryden : 
briefly , I believe that this motion was introduced by Senator Stratton and he spoke on it . 
senator Carstairs : 
he just finished . 
senator Bryden : 
he just finished speaking on it . 
senator Di Nino very clearly said , " I am now going to speak on behalf of Senator Stratton . " 
is Senator Stratton now speaking again ? 
senator Di Nino : 
i did not say that . 
senator Bryden : 
you did . 
if that is so , the debate is finished . 
senator Di Nino : 
i said that I would finish Senator Stratton ' s speech . 
senator Bryden : 
can we get the comment read back ? 
we used to be able to do that in court . 
he said he was speaking for Senator Stratton . 
senator Di Nino : 
i do not speak for anyone else but myself at any time . 
senator Gigant è s : 
you said you would finish his speech . 
senator Di Nino : 
i am reading a speech that was prepared for me , as is the case here all the time , especially on the other side . 
senator Bryden : 
senator Stratton , through Senator Di Nino - I guess it is like Edgar Bergen through Charlie McCarthy - is now finishing Senator Stratton ' s speech . 
if that is Senator Stratton ' s speech , then he is now giving another speech , and the debate is over . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , this is a very interesting point . 
i do not believe we have a mechanism where senators can speak for another senator . 
i can only assume that Senator Di Nino is speaking for Senator Di Nino . 
he is certainly the only one I see on his feet . 
senator Di Nino : 
thank you , Your Honour . 
i should like to assure Senator Bryden , and all my colleagues opposite , that I will never rise to speak on behalf of anyone else . 
i shall always speak on my own behalf , possibly in the same vein as someone , else either agreeing or disagreeing , but I will speak on my own behalf . 
senator Gigant è s : 
Hooray ! 
senator Di Nino : 
we need a little livening up here on Thursday afternoon . 
the weather is very bad out there so no - one can go home anyway . 
i do not think the planes are flying , so let us stay here for the rest of the night . 
senator Bryden : 
will your speech be more accurate ? 
senator Di Nino : 
if I may continue , honourable senators , here we are . 
i would like to make some suggestions to the minister . 
honourable senators , as we continue this debate , we will include a list of suggestions on how the minister can deal with this issue in the next budget . 
however , that is for another time and will have to wait until possibly next week , next month or the fall . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator Spivak , debate adjourned . 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Ghitter calling the attention of the Senate to the concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution : ( a ) its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; ( b ) alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; ( c ) the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire to see equal numbers of Senators representing each province ; ( d ) the length of term of office ; ( e ) the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level ; and ( f ) the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . - ( 
honourable Senator Gigant è s ) . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , Senator Ghitter addressed a serious matter that we cannot disregard . 
it is a fact that certain parts of the country somehow feel left out of the political process , the process of decision - making . 
that may be easy to dismiss . 
i can give a whole list of ways to refute each argument from those people , but the fact is that those people feel left out . 
unfortunately , I am not sure that Senator Ghitter gave suitable , serious consideration to the issue . 
the fact that in this chamber we are two fairly centralist parties - one left of centre a little , but not very much , one right of centre a little , but not very much , - is a unifying factor for the country . 
do we wish to sacrifice that so that we can sit in our little regional caucuses , talking to one another about our own problems without exchanging information with other regions of the country ? 
that is not very well thought out . 
in suggesting that , Senator Ghitter also suggests somehow that partisanship is bad . 
people must tend to the care and feeding of those parties , to collecting funds for them , to organizing their functioning , and to battle in elections . 
this is partisanship . 
without it , we do not have a democracy . 
it is wrong to say , " Ah , if only everyone were non - partisan . " 
we sound like Stalin when we say that , although I am not suggesting that Senator Ghitter is an admirer of Stalin . 
consider this business of not wanting an elected Senate . 
there would be errors and difficulties in electing the Senate . 
however , if he pins his solution on not electing the Senate , he leaves the Senate in the same bind it has been in since 1867 . 
they are not supporting our proposition . " 
if the Senate opposes their proposition , they say , " What good is the Senate ? 
it is opposing something that we want . " 
the people on either side of an issue will always say that the Senate has no legitimacy because it is not elected , if we do not do as they wish . 
therefore , not electing the Senate is not necessarily a good solution . 
these are serious matters that must be considered . 
i do not think Senator Ghitter gave them sufficient consideration . 
he reflected the sort of stuff that one hears on talk shows , and I submit that this institution deserves better than being discussed in the terms of a talk - show complaint . 
i think we should examine this issue . 
i hope to participate with colleagues on both sides in examining it , but not in order to respond simply to the complaints of a Mr. Jack Aubry or any other journalist . 
this is too serious a matter . 
this is too central an institution and , in many ways , too unifying an institution . 
consider the appointing process . 
senator Ghitter wants to substitute a committee for the Prime Minister . 
senator Di Nino : 
what a great idea . 
senator Gigant è s : 
hold on . 
prime Minister Mulroney , whom I did not particularly like , as you are all aware , has appointed some fine senators . 
i like Senator Jessiman . 
i think he is a fine senator . 
senator Di Nino is a fine senator , even though he irritates my bowel occasionally . 
senator DeWare is magnificent . 
i find Senator Lynch - Staunton a difficult but effective Leader of the Opposition . 
but it was Mr. Mulroney who appointed him , not a committee . 
committees , remember , given the job of designing a horse , often come up with a camel . 
i do hope we will have more serious consideration of this issue than Senator Ghitter gave in his speech , which sounded as if he were playing for the favour of talk shows . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
are you suggesting that Senator Ghitter did not give this issue some thought ; that he was frivolous , and that his inquiry and his comments were without thought or without consideration of a serious nature ? 
is this what you are saying ? 
senator Gigant è s : 
i am saying that for a counsel learned in the law and a man with his experience in government , he produced comments which are way below his capacity , and he is quite capable of doing much better . 
i much admire many of the qualities of Senator Ghitter . 
i sat once in the Energy Committee when he was presiding , and I found it very instructive , very fine ; much higher intellectually in terms of what he was saying there than what he said in this chamber on the issue of the Senate . 
senator Di Nino : 
i can assure you that we on this side do not feel the same way . 
senator Gigant è s : 
i did not expect you to feel the same way on that side . 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , I , too , rise to speak on this particular matter . 
i have provided a written version of some of my thoughts to other persons who once sat in this chamber , one being the Honourable Duff Roblin . 
he has seen what I am about to share with you , and he thought it was worthy of at least some consideration by the Senate , notwithstanding that some of the things I will say will certainly be contrary to what the Honourable Senator Gigant è s said to us earlier . 
reforming the Senate of Canada has been the subject of discussion among politicians , academics , editors and the general public since shortly after Confederation in 1867 . 
with the defeat of the Charlottetown Accord on October 26 , 1992 , the last attempt to reform the Senate failed . 
notwithstanding all of the effective work that this chamber has done in the last several years , the media report that the public at large continue to want the Senate reformed , and a number clamour for its abolition . 
to reform it , as many have suggested , or abolish it will require a constitutional change , and this certainly will not be done in the near term . 
it is therefore my humble view that , in the short term , nothing will be done to reform this chamber unless we in the Senate are prepared to advance some suggestions that do not require an amendment to the Constitution . 
i should like the Senate to consider making the following recommendations to the Governor General in Council : 
( 1 ) A Joint Parliamentary Committee should be established to advise the Prime Minister on the desirability of appointing an independent - 
- and I emphasize the word " independent " - 
- commission ( the Appointments Commission ) consisting of three eminent Canadians from each of the following regions of Canada , namely : 
region 1 - British Columbia and the Yukon 
region 2 - Alberta , Saskatchewan , Manitoba , the Northwest Territories and Nunavut 
region 3 - Ontario 
region 4 - Quebec 
this Appointments Commission would not be too dissimilar to the manner in which Justices to our Superior Courts are appointed to the Bench . 
( 2 ) Provisions in respect of the Appointments Commission should include the following : 
( a ) Except for unusual circumstances as may be determined by a majority of the members of the Appointments Commission , meetings thereof shall be held by means of conference telephone . 
( c ) Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be held in person or as otherwise determined unanimously by the members of each Subcommittee ; 
( d ) If a Subcommittee cannot unanimously agree as to the person to be recommended for appointment to the Senate , the matter shall be referred to the Appointments Commission as a whole for final determination ; 
( e ) term of office of its members 
( f ) the filling of vacancies ; 
( g ) the remuneration , if any , of its members ; and 
( h ) the appointment of officers , e . g . Chairman . 
( 3 ) The Appointments Commission should be given guidelines in respect to the appointment of Senators as follows : 
( a ) At least one of every two persons selected for appointment shall be female , with the goal that in future there would be an equal representation of men and women from each of the five ( 5 ) regions of Canada ; 
( b ) Except in respect to subparagraph ( c ) ( v ) of this section , ( Politicians or ex - politicians ) , all such persons to be selected for appointment to the Senate shall be persons with at least twenty ( 20 ) years of experience in a given field of expertise . 
( c ) The following are suggestions as to the type of person that should be appointed to the Senate : 
( i ) Academics who have distinguished themselves in their field of expertise ; 
( ii ) Distinguished business persons who have owned and / or operated a small or large business enterprise ; 
( iii ) Persons who are well versed in the subject of agriculture ; 
( iv ) Professional persons such as economists , physicians , lawyers , accountants , engineers , architects , journalists , et cetera , who have distinguished themselves in their professions ; 
( v ) Politicians or ex - politicians who have served as a : 
( aa ) Minister in the House of Commons ; 
( bb ) Minister in a Provincial Legislature ; 
( cc ) Leader of an official party in the House of Commons ; 
( dd ) Premier in a Provincial Legislature ; 
( ee ) Leader of Opposition in a Provincial Legislature ; and / or 
( ff ) Member of the House of Commons or a Provincial Legislature for a total of not less than five ( 5 ) years ; 
( vi ) Such other Canadians ( to comprise no more than 10 % of the number of Senators ) as the Commission may deem appropriate for appointment . 
( d ) The number of persons recommended for appointment to the Senate from any one of sub - paragraphs 3 ( c ) ( i ) to 3 ( c ) ( v ) shall be limited to not more than twenty ( 20 ) per cent of the number of Senators appointed . 
( 4 ) All present and future senators should agree that for a period of time - ( e . g . 12 months at a time and from time to time thereafter ) the following rules as to voting in the Senate shall apply , namely : 
honourable senators , here I set out the regions . 
i hope it will be printed as per these columns setting out the origin or region , number of senators , votes per senator , total votes per province , total votes per region . 
region One is British Columbia . 
region Three would be Ontario , 24 senators , 1 vote each , 24 total . 
region 4 would be Quebec , 24 senators , 1 vote each , 24 total . 
region 5 , New Brunswick would have 10 , each with 0.75 of a vote for a total of 7.5 votes . 
the total ends with 24 votes each . 
that formula would result in equal representation by region . 
it can be done down to the level of provinces . 
certainly , this would result in a Senate that is equal by region , and effective . 
even if we could take the next step - the change for which everyone seems to clamour - and have the senators elected , and we cannot , that would not in my opinion provide the quality of membership that would result from the appointment of senators by an independent body as set out above . 
( 5 ) Present senators and future senators should consider themselves as representative of one of the regions . 
( 6 ) Senators of each region shall from their own caucuses and determine their own officers in terms of office . 
( 7 ) The Senate , by a majority vote , shall recommend to the Governor General in Council : 
( a ) the person who should hold the office of Speaker of the Senate ; and 
( b ) the term for which such person should hold office . 
( 8 ) The Clerk , the Usher of the Black Rod and such other officers , as shall be determined by a majority of the Senate , shall be elected by a majority vote of the Senate and shall hold office for such periods as the majority of the Senate may from time to time decide . 
( 9 ) The remuneration to be paid to all officers of the Senate , including that of the Speaker , shall be determined from time to time by a majority vote of the Senate . 
( 10 ) The powers of the Senate will remain as at present , except a Bill of the House of Commons defeated in the Senate would not be reconsidered by the Senate until the expiration of thirteen months from the date the Bill was first introduced to the Senate . 
upon such reintroduction of the Bill to the Senate , the Senate would pass such Bill without debate . 
senator Stewart : 
more power to Ontario ! 
senator Jessima n : 
( 11 ) The Rules of the Senate are to be such as may be determined by a majority vote of the Senate from time to time . 
the Rules are to include such matters as are provided in the Rules today but also to include how such Bills of the House of Commons will be received to be dealt with by the Senate . 
( 12 ) Senators who do not attend meetings of the Senate except for medical or other valid reasons - 
i might add , maybe we should have our own independent medical officer determining that . 
senator Gigant è s : 
or a commission of doctors at least . 
senator Jessima n : 
- ( e . g . doing work on behalf of the Senate elsewhere ) will have their sessional allowance reduced by an amount of at least $ 500 per day for each day the Senator has not attended meetings of the Senate . 
( 13 ) The Senate should encourage the House of Commons to amend the Parliament of Canada Act so that : 
( a ) the present $ 10,000 tax - free allowance for Senators and the $ 21,300 tax - free allowance for Members of the House of Commons be cancelled . 
( b ) Senators and the Members of the House of Commons be paid a reasonable amount by way of sessional allowance to properly reflect the work they perform in Parliament . 
( c ) Senators and Members of the House of Commons be paid for reasonable accommodation , travel , and other expenses incurred while on business for Parliament and for which they have provided duly verified receipts . 
( 14 ) The Appointments Commission and its five Subcommittees shall remain in existence at the pleasure of the Governor General in Council . 
if the Senate operated on the above basis , it would properly carry out the function for which it was intended : one , represent the various regions in Canada , and two , provide a sober second thought to legislation passed by the House of Commons . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Lucier , debate adjourned . 
visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before we proceed any further , I would like to draw your attention to a visitor from the other place in our gallery , Mr. Pat O ' Brien , MP for London - Fanshawe . 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
leave having been given to proceed to Notice of Inquiry No. 21 : 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier rose pursuant to notice of Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the Journ é e internationale de la francophonie , on Friday , March 20 , 1998 . 
i am pleased , during this week celebrating the Francophonie , to point out that Canada has been a pioneer in this area . 
it manifested an interest in the countries sharing the use of French a number of years before the Francophonie became what one might call institutionalized . 
the Francophonie , as we know it today , consists of 52 states and governments sharing the use of French , either as an official language or as a language of usage or culture . 
there are 140 million " real " francophones , that is to say men and women for whom French is either their mother tongue or their language of use . 
in addition , there are 62 million occasional francophones . 
the Francophonie is political , cultural and technical . 
if there are some similarities with the British Commonwealth of Nations - for example , that it is spread over all the continents - it differs from it in a number of areas , particularly in the fact that there is no single person at its head . 
the Commonwealth is headed by the Queen of Great Britain , who is also the sovereign of Canada , Ireland , Australia , New Zealand and a number of other republics . 
within the Francophonie , no single head of state has supremacy over the others . 
in the Commonwealth , a number of countries have English as their sole official language . 
as in the Commonwealth , there is a diversity of political structures in the Francophonie . 
it was in western Africa , in Niamey , the capital of Niger , that the birth certificate of the francophone community was signed in February 1969 . 
from February 17 to 20 , 1969 , at the invitation of the President of Niger , Diori Hamani , some thirty nations from four continents - Europe , Asia , Africa and America - met to raise the foundations of La Francophonie at the first conference of countries partially or entirely French - speaking . 
following a remarkable presentation by Andr é Malraux , France , represented by the national education secretary , Jacques Trorial , declared that the conference represented the real " launch of the francophonie idea . " 
he then spoke three words , which , to this day , have served as motto to all the members of La Francophonie : equality , complementarity and solidarity . 
we realize that the francophone element of our country will grow only through the furthering of our relations with all countries that , like ours , share in the French language and culture . 
canada , however , did not wait until the Niamey conference to give tangible expression to its interest in establishing relations with French - speaking countries . 
sometime around 1960 , with the independence of the Belgian and French colonies , Canada took an interest in Africa and in possibilities for francophone cooperation . 
initially , it committed only modest sums to this pursuit , but , by 1969 , its budget for cooperation with these countries had reached $ 30 million . 
we could go back further and show that Canadian aid to French - speaking countries predated the Niamey conference by several years . 
in 1961 , it extended this Asian experiment to French - speaking countries in Africa and to Madagascar . 
the contribution of funding to these countries was followed , in 1962 , by the establishment of diplomatic relations , and the appointment of the first Canadian ambassador to French - speaking Africa . 
prior to this mission , Canada focused on technical assistance : teachers and advisers were sent , and trainees and interns received . 
to this kind of cooperation , the Chevrier mission added assistance for investment and infrastructure programs . 
it was thus that Canada took part in a vast rural development project in Morocco , in the construction of four general colleges in Senegal and in rural electrification in Ivory Coast . 
also in Ivory Coast , it helped organized the national library in Abidjan . 
in Tunisia , Canada helped build three secondary schools . 
it introduced a livestock vaccination program in Niger . 
in Dahomey and Togo , it established an electrical distribution system that also served the English - speaking country of Ghana . 
over the years , Canadian assistance to French - speaking countries has continued to grow and diversify . 
last November , at the Hanoi summit , Canada proudly announced that public development assistance to French - speaking nations in 1996 - 97 had reached $ 467 million . 
the Hanoi summit , it should be mentioned , witnessed what could be called the birth of the political French - speaking world , and the election of Boutros Boutros - Ghali , former Secretary General of the UN , to the position of Secretary General of La Francophonie . 
as an Egyptian , who had helped his country become an associate member of the Agence de la Francophonie and a summit participant , Mr. Boutros - Ghali took pleasure in recalling that the desire for La Francophonie arose from outside France . 
in the spirit of the Francophonie , there were numerous other institutions , some before Niamey and some after : the Richelieu clubs , created here in Ottawa in 1944 ; the Union internationale des journalistes de langue fran ç aise , founded in 1950 ; the Association des universit é s partiellement ou enti è rement de langue fran ç aise , created in 1961 . 
as well , something that concerns us in the Senate of Canada very directly , the Assembl é e internationale des parlementaires de langue fran ç aise , which I have had the honour of heading for the past year . 
the idea for such an association of francophones and francophiles originated with OCAM , the Organisation commune africaine et malagache . 
as the years passed , this organization came to exercise a strong influence within the Francophonie . 
its first secretary - general , Xavier Deniau , the member of Parliament for Loiret , and France ' s former Minister of Departments and Overseas Territories , remains one of the key figures of the Francophonie . 
over the years , the association has opened up its membership to parliamentarians who use French as their language of international relations . 
thus its membership now includes those for whom French is neither mother tongue nor official language . 
there are a number of other organizations witnessing to the importance and vitality of the Francophonie . 
in addition to the ones we have already mentioned , there are the Conseil international de la langue fran ç aise , the first meeting of which was held at Versailles in 1968 ; the Association internationale des professeurs de fran ç ais , dating from 1969 ; the Association des di é t é ticiens de langue fran ç aise ; the Association des navigants de langue fran ç aise ; not to mention associations of French - speaking sociologists , physicians and so on . 
more tangibly , there is the field of communications . 
who has not heard of the Communaut é radiophonique des pays de langue fran ç aise ? 
who has not heard of TV 5 ? 
need I mention the diversity of Canada ' s contribution to culture ? 
our writers are published and read in France , Belgium , Switzerland and many other countries . 
our artists perform on stages throughout the French - speaking world . 
some examples I could mention are writers Antonine Maillet , from New Brunswick , Anne H é bert and Jacques Godbout , from Quebec , Franco - Ontarian Jean É thier - Blais , Manitoban Gabrielle Roy , and many others . 
in the world of music , there are pianists Andr é Laplante , Louis Lortie and Marc - Andr é Hamelin , lyricist Luc Plamondon , singers Robert Charlebois , Claude L é veill é e , Gilles Vigneault , and C é line Dion , to mention just a few . 
in France , the memory of F é lix Leclerc is still just as alive today as it is in Canada . 
some of our painters whose fame has spread throughout the French - speaking world include Fernand Leduc , Alfred Pellan and Jean - Paul Riopelle . 
members of our business community have made their mark on the French - speaking world as well . 
Paul Desmarais , Laurent Beaudoin and Pierre P é ladeau stood out at the Francophone Business Forum , an organization created at the Quebec summit in 1987 . 
this forum is one of the rare non - governmental organizations that has succeeded in mobilizing members of the business community directly . 
its founding members were all Canadians or Africans . 
the forum created an international office with headquarters , which were inaugurated in 1990 , in Montreal . 
with financial assistance from Canada and technical support from the Banque internationale d ' information sur les É tats francophones , the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co - operation set up the Banque d ' information des gens d ' affaires . 
as can be seen , La Francophonie has many faces . 
it is present at numerous international events . 
the Summit of Heads of State and Heads of Government of member countries still captures world attention . 
one of these summits was held in Quebec City in 1987 , the most recent took place in Hanoi last November , and the next is scheduled for Moncton , New Brunswick , in 1999 . 
la Francophonie is also present in the world of sports . 
it holds its own games . 
the next such games will take place in the National Capital Region , in Ottawa - Hull , in 2001 . 
clearly , the French - speaking world is constantly evolving . 
its roots lie deep in a shared culture anchored by a common language . 
hon. John G . Bryden : 
honourable senators , a little over three years ago , I had the honour of being sworn into the Senate at the same time as Jean - Robert Gauthier . 
little did I know on that day that I would be accompanying a person of such courage , and such a huge heart and commitment to his family , his institutions and his country . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. G é rald - A . 
i would like to add a few words to this tribute to my friend Jean - Robert Gauthier . 
his most remarkable speech gave me great pleasure . 
congratulations . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lorna Milne rose pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 : 
honourable senators , there are not too many of us here right now , but I suggest to those who are here to keep your eyes open . 
there will be a new crop growing in Canada . 
for the first time in over 60 years , hemp will be legal . 
for the first time in three generations , hemp will be legally grown in North America , and Canadian farmers will be the first to profit from it . 
last Friday , March 13 , the Minister of Health , Allan Rock , announced in Tillsonburg , Ontario , that Canadian farmers would be allowed to grow hemp this spring . 
this is two years ahead of the initial target which was set for 2000 . 
Mr. Rock only arrived in the Ministry of Health in July 1997 , but he managed to quickly understand the issues surrounding him . 
not only did he understand , he took action . 
essentially , the minister recognized and agreed with the incredible potential that Canadian farmers see in hemp as a cash crop , so he has brought it to them two years earlier than expected . 
the many people in the Ministries of Health , Agriculture , Revenue and Justice and the Solicitor General who worked on this legislation also deserve a great deal of credit , for without them , farmers would still be unable to plant hemp . 
let me recount the recent story of this great agricultural event to remind honourable senators of the quintessential role that the Senate played in enabling this quiet revolution . 
in the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee , as we listened to the evidence presented by several groups , the value of hemp fibre as an agricultural crop and the basis for a Canadian industrial thrust forward became quite clear . 
as I said in this place on June 19 , 1996 : 
two groups appeared before the committee to talk about hemp . 
Hempline has been granted licences by Health Canada to grow crops for research purposes . 
the Canadian Industrial Hemp Lobby also gave evidence . 
it rapidly became apparent that the growth of fibre hemp , fibre cannabis , as an agricultural crop , presented us with a win - win situation . 
the opportunity to add hemp fibre to Canada ' s agricultural pantheon arose through the exemption of non - viable seeds of hemp plants from the definition of " controlled substances . " 
we seized upon this loophole and expanded it by adding " mature hemp stock ( including fibre ) , " to the clause . 
this simple but far - reaching amendment was passed unanimously by the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee , by the Senate itself , and was given Royal Assent on June 19 , 1966 . 
honourable senators , amending the original legislation was not our only role in helping the farmers of Canada . 
in April 1997 , almost a year after the legislation had received Royal Assent , the Senate and its Standing Committee on National Finance called members of Health Canada to appear before it . 
as part of that committees ' study of the Estimates , we asked the officials about the status of the regulations necessary to allow the cultivation of industrial hemp . 
the officials before us were not surprised by our questions but were unwilling to give us an exact date for the publication of the regulations . 
they cited high workloads as being the major reason for their lack of progress . 
however , I think anticipating our wrath , they offered a commitment to a January - 1998 deadline , which would allow farmers to begin planting a crop in the spring of this year . 
honourable senators , they came through on their deadline . 
essentially , the Senate took this bill , which had been sloppily drafted and then passed by the other place - or perhaps rubber - stamped would be a better description - and made it into something that gives real potential to Canadian farmers . 
they now have the option of moving from other crops such as tobacco - a damaging crop both in the sense of its effects on the environment and of its various end products on human health - to the production of something that has a myriad of positive uses . 
essentially , hemp can be grown across Canada . 
furthermore , hemp not only improves the condition of the soil by adding organic matter , it is also a major converter of so - called greenhouse gas . 
i do not want to bore honourable senators by repeating myself but the potential uses of hemp are incredible and greatly varied . 
it can be used for particle board , fabric , fuel , food in the form of its oil and its seeds , cosmetics , and many other things which are still in the process of being explored . 
at this point , however , perhaps some of its most impressive and environmentally sound uses are in the paper industry and in fabricating strong , lightweight biodegradable panels for the automotive industry . 
therefore , hemp is an economically viable alternative to the use of trees in paper products and to the use of non - renewable resources in the form of metal or plastic in cars . 
this can only help to decrease the devastating environmental effects of deforestation and even the canopy loss which has been so greatly increased by the recent ice storm throughout this area and eastward . 
honourable senators , let me remind you again of the differences between industrial hemp and marijuana . 
industrial hemp seeds and fibre must have a THC level of 0.3 per cent or lower . 
that means only three parts in 1,000 . 
obviously , anyone wishing to use industrial hemp for narcotic purposes will have a difficult time . 
all they will get for their purposes is a massive headache . 
farmers constantly feel that they are under threat by urbanized society . 
the cities draw in their children who no longer wish or are no longer able to work on farms . 
politicians tend to make laws which support the majority of their constituents , who are generally urban . 
we often forget that food is essential to life . 
our food supply and our farmers are a basic , invaluable and essential part of this nation . 
at present , many farmers are demoralized , and good agricultural land is going out of production because of farmer - unfriendly legislation . 
the Senate ' s amendment to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act helps to right this imbalance . 
moreover , I believe that our amendment will allow Canadian farmers to be more competitive in the global environment . 
this will give all of Canada a great advantage in the world economy . 
right now , there is an enormous demand for industrial hemp in the United States . 
the American state governments are nowhere near passing regulations to allow for the production of hemp . 
Canadian farmers will be in a position to supply the U.S. market and to compete with the Chinese , who are currently filling that demand . 
there is also potential for a great deal of spin - off benefits to Canadian industry . 
as I said before , the production of industrial hemp will eventually lead to jobs , jobs , jobs . 
the regulations developed by Health Canada take stringent steps to assure the Canadian public , Customs and Excise , and law enforcement officials that no one will be able to grow marijuana and hide it as hemp . 
these strict requirements exist through all the stages of growing and processing the product and will make it virtually impossible to get away with any subterfuge . 
honourable senators , the Senate ' s reputation will be greatly improved by our handling of this matter . 
now and then , opportunities such as this arise . 
be on the look out for them , new senators . 
if we continue to work in such a timely fashion and to support our colleagues when they bring such positive motions before us or draw these opportunities to our attention , we will , in quiet ways , do a great deal more than merely improve legislation through our traditional sober - second - look role . 
we will occasionally be able to bring in something new and beneficial to all Canadians . 
in conclusion , when you are driving along the highways of this great country later this year , watch for fields full of something that may look a little different . 
since most of us here are urban people , I venture to say that no one in this chamber has seen hemp growing before . 
watch 300 or 400 plants per metre shoot up to heights of 10 to 14 feet . 
watch this new opportunity being harvested in August . 
watch history being made . 
just watch our Canadian farmers beat the world . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , debate adjourned . 
Canadian War Museum 
social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare , for Senator Murray , pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology which was authorized to examine and report upon all matters relating to the future of the Canadian War Museum including , but not restricted to , its structure , budget , name , and independence , be empowered to present its final report no later than Tuesday , June 30 , 1998 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Senators : 
motion agreed to . 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of Senate 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , on behalf of the Honourable Senator Lise Bacon , pursuant to notice of Wednesday , March 18 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. on Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 , for its examination of Bill C - 17 , an Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 48 
Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
welcome to New Page 
page Exchange Program with House of Commons 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
the Francophonie Games 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
adjournment 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , Paris and Strasbourg , France - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , Committee on Economic Affairs and Development , London , England - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
national Unity 
position of British Columbia on Quebec ' s Status - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
human Rights 
possible Promotion by Prime Minister of International Human Rights - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Relations 
prospect of Funding for Clean - Up of Halifax Harbour - Government Position 
human Rights 
organization of American States - Timing for Ratification of Inter - American Convention on Human Rights - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Concluded 
scrutiny of Regulations 
consideration of Second Report of Standing Joint Committee - Order Withdrawn 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate continued 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee - Motion Modified - Debate Continued 
income Tax Act 
motion Proposing an Amendment - Debate Continued 
reports on Social and Economic Development 
inquiry - Debate Concluded 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Motion to Authorize Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources Committee to Examine and Review the Process - Order Stands 
human Rights in Asia 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
civil Code of Quebec 
difficulties and Problems Arising from Section 35 - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate 
vacant Ontario Seat - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to a group of distinguished visitors in our gallery . 
they are a group of parliamentarians from the United Kingdom branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association . 
on behalf of the Senate of Canada , I wish you welcome to our Senate . 
welcome to New Page 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , as you will recall , our chief page Greg Doiron left us recently , and today we have a replacement . 
i should like to introduce to you Hamish Kidston from Maple Ridge , British Columbia , who is presently working towards a Bachelor of Commerce degree in Human Resources Management at the University of Ottawa , where he will be finishing next summer . 
welcome to the Senate . 
page Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I also wish to welcome an exchange page from the House of Commons . 
Eric comes from Edmunston , New Brunswick . 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
the Francophonie Games 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , I would like to begin by expressing my satisfaction with the federal government ' s decision to re - establish funding for the Court Challenges Program . 
this program , as we know , provided Canadian linguistic communities with access to funding in cases involving their language rights on the federal or provincial level . 
i am pleased with the success of the efforts that have been expended by the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne to get the government to reinstate this program , which is so vital to the communities . 
i see this as a sign that , when an ongoing open dialogue is maintained on matters affecting the Canadian francophonie , a consensus can be reached , if not unanimity . 
in the same vein , I would like to invite the governments of Canada and Quebec to exhibit the same spirit of dialogue in the dispute which pits them against each other on the matter of the Francophonie Games to be held in Ottawa - Hull in 2001 . 
another flag dispute has started up in recent weeks , stirred up by the preparations for this international event to be held on Canadian soil , and this dispute does not in any way serve the interests of the francophones of Canada and of Quebec . 
the purpose of these Games is to cultivate friendship between peoples and to celebrate brotherhood within the big international francophone family . 
within the family of the Francophonie , there must be room for every member who is entitled to be there . 
that is where the true enemies of Canadian francophonie are found , nowhere else . 
in conclusion , this is why I am calling upon the government authorities , in both Canada and Quebec , to show some flexibility in the collaboration they must engage in , if the success of this great francophone celebration is to be assured . 
squabbles between federalists and sovereignists must not be allowed to detract from the generous feeling of fellowship that is the reason the international Francophonie exists . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance concerning the examination of the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , laid before Parliament for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 . 
i ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day , and that it form part of the permanent record of this house . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that , when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 at 1:30 p.m. 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , before the Speaker calls for the vote , I rise to ask what will become the traditional question on this day : 
what understandings have been reached between the Deputy Leader of the Government and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition as to the business before us tomorrow ? 
what is the reasonable expectation for the time of adjournment ? 
can a committee chairman safely convene a committee for 3:30 tomorrow afternoon , or must one seek leave from the Senate to sit while the Senate is sitting ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , Senator Kinsella and I have had discussions . 
every effort is being made on both sides of this chamber to facilitate the session so that it will come to its natural conclusion at or about 3:15 p.m. 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , to bring more certainty to this matter , I wish to advise this honourable house that if we are not adjourned at 3:15 , I shall rise and move the adjournment motion . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I will give consent , but perhaps not for the rest of my days . 
when will the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders finally study the role of independent senators on certain committees ? 
that study has been repeatedly postponed . 
they think that I will bark but not bite . 
i am now in the mood to become more active on this endeavour . 
we talk about the reform of Canada , the reform of the Constitution and about a better Senate , yet we cannot even agree on a little rule to accommodate senators who do not want to escape their responsibilities but want to work , and who have some experience to offer . 
do not allow me to get upset . 
tell me that something is happening . 
this is becoming a joke , to which I do not take kindly . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that the first item of business before the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders is attendance , upon which they have been directed by this chamber to report . 
the next item is the structure of committees and the membership of committees . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
thank you . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , Paris and Strasbourg , France - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association , which represented Canada at the meeting of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly held in Paris and Strasbourg , France , from June 19 to 25 , 1997 . 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , Committee on Economic Affairs and Development , London , England - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I also have the honour to table the report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association , which represented Canada at the meeting of the Committee on Economic Affairs and Development of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly on the operations of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development from February 17 to 18 , 1997 , in London , England . 
national Unity 
position of British Columbia on Quebec ' s Status - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Pat Carney : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday , March 26 , 1998 , I will call the attention of the Senate to British Columbia ' s recognition of Quebec ' s uniqueness and the frustration of British Columbians with our province ' s role in Confederation as profiled in the report of the B.C. Unity Panel . 
question PERIOD 
human Rights 
possible Promotion by Prime Minister of International Human Rights - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , yesterday the President of the United States , Mr. Bill Clinton , launched a six - nation , 12 - day tour across Africa to promote human rights and criticize corruption and human rights abuses . 
the newspapers indicate that he will also urge African nations to undertake measures to enable them to prosper in the next millennium . 
the trip is also designed to enhance awareness in the Western World of the greatness of African nations . 
here in Canada , Prime Minister Chr é tien has been peppered with criticism that he is soft on human rights issues . 
a notable example of this is the delinkage of human rights issues with economic matters at the APEC conference in Vancouver recently . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate whether the Prime Minister is actively planning any excursions similar to that of President Clinton in order to promote international human rights during this , the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , to my knowledge , the Prime Minister is not planning any specific journeys abroad for any specific purpose related to human rights . 
however , as my honourable friend would know , every time the Prime Minister goes abroad to countries where there are human rights difficulties or violations , he consistently raises those issues with the leaders of those countries . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , the Governor General is being accompanied on his trip to India and Pakistan by Minister Herb Dhaliwal and Secretary of State for Asia , Raymond Chan . 
considering the grave state of affairs in India and Pakistan , such as the genocide of Muslims in Kashmir and the subjugation of women in the Pakistani legal system , is Senator Graham aware whether his colleagues in the House of Commons will address these human rights issues while there ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I do not have any specific knowledge as to what my cabinet colleagues on this particular mission with the Governor General may say , but I would be happy to report back upon their return . 
federal - Provincial Relations 
prospect of Funding for Clean - Up of Halifax Harbour - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the premier elect of Nova Scotia , Dr. Hamm , has asked me to make an inquiry on his behalf so he can get to work tomorrow morning on , among other things , the clean - up of Halifax Harbour , which has been going on now for some eight or ten years . 
can the minister tell us whether the government has been approached by the Government of Nova Scotia , led by whoever may have been leading it in recent years , with respect to additional funding to complete the job that was undertaken some years ago ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as my honourable friend knows , this problem has been around for a long time and has been reviewed by governments of various stripes , both provincially and federally . 
representations have been made to me and to others with respect to this outstanding problem . 
however , I am not aware of any specific action contemplated at the present time . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , do I take it , then , that neither Dr. Savage nor Premier MacLellan has made any specific approach to the Leader of the Government in recent weeks or months to deal with it ? 
senator Graham : 
nor Dr. Hamm . 
senator Forrestall : 
i know representations have been made to him . 
as the minister responsible for carrying the voice of Nova Scotian concerns to the federal cabinet , would he support such an initiative ? 
the amount of $ 71 million is being bandied about to kick - start a particular part of this project . 
could we have the minister ' s views on whether he would support that effort ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , this is an important matter not only to the people who reside on either side of Halifax Harbour but the people who visit the beautiful cities of Halifax and Dartmouth , now known as Super - Halifax . 
it is a problem of which all Nova Scotians are cognizant . 
i would be happy to review and update the situation to determine if any action can be taken under the circumstances . 
human Rights 
organization of American States - Timing for Ratification of Inter - American Convention on Human Rights - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
honourable senators will recall that the Progressive Conservative government of former prime minister Brian Mulroney saw Canada become party to the Organization of American States . 
there is the matter of the human rights instruments of the Organization of American States , in particular , the Inter - American Convention on Human Rights . 
a study was undertaken by Canadian officials some seven or eight years ago at the federal , provincial and territorial levels concerning the appropriateness of Canada ratifying the Inter - American Convention on Human Rights . 
what is the status of our domestic negotiations with the provinces ? 
when might we expect Canada to ratify the Inter - American Convention on Human Rights so that we can become full partners in the human rights protection and promotion efforts of the OAS ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would be happy to bring the Senate up to date on that matter as well . 
orders OF THE DAY 
Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to the motion for second reading of Bill C - 6 , the Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Act , that is before us today . 
at the outset may I say that I have a particular and personal interest in this piece of legislation because for a number of years , in another life , I served as a member of the board of directors of Northern Transportation . 
that was prior to its status being changed from that of a Crown corporation to that of a private corporation owned and operated by two groups of aboriginal people from the Northwest Territories . 
the Mackenzie River , which , as you may know , is the third largest watershed in North America after the Mississippi and the St. Lawrence , is also the largest northward flowing river on this continent . 
since the early days of our history , it has served as the major supply route to the Western Arctic . 
i have had the opportunity to experience its value at firsthand , travelling first across Great Slave Lake and then the length of the Mackenzie by tugboat , pushing two acres of barges carrying supplies destined for the northern communities which were serviced enroute , navigating several sets of rapids , and ending up 10 days later at Tuktoyuktuk . 
through that trip and many other experiences in the North , I learned the value of the Mackenzie Valley region , not only economically , but also , and perhaps more important environmentally as the home of many of our aboriginal people and of the northern wildlife which still provides for many of their needs . 
the Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Act is the result of more than five years of consultation and negotiation . 
it is a complex and technical bill , but its overriding objective is straightforward - to protect an important and fragile northern ecosystem while fulfilling land commitments to aboriginal people . 
honourable senators , Bill C - 6 will establish an integrated resource co - management regime in the Mackenzie Valley region of the Northwest Territories . 
this is a constitutional obligation of the Government of Canada arising out of land claim agreements of the Gwich ' in and Sahtu Dene and M é tis people . 
as legislators , we must ensure that Canada lives up to its commitments to aboriginal people . 
there is another important reason for supporting this legislation - the need to provide consistency , certainty and effectiveness in resource management and environmental assessment processes across the Mackenzie Valley . 
bill C - 6 will achieve this by putting in place a single , integrated regime that will operate efficiently , effectively and affordably . 
applying the regime across the valley will ensure that the same rules , regulations and processes apply to both settlement and non - settlement lands , and to both the north and south of the valley . 
it will ensure that the decision - making takes into account what is right for the entire Mackenzie Valley ecosystem and all of its communities and residents , and not just the interests of a particular region . 
the legislation is essential to preserve and protect the environment , honourable senators , but it is also important for the economy . 
the resource industries need consistency and certainty in order to invest in development projects ; projects that hold great promise for job creation , economic growth and an improved standard of living in the Mackenzie Valley . 
consistency will come in the form of two institutions of public government : the Mackenzie Valley Land and Water Board , and the Environmental Impact Review Board , both of which will have jurisdiction throughout the valley . 
honourable senators may be aware that some First Nations who have not yet signed land claims agreements oppose the application of Bill C - 6 across the Mackenzie Valley . 
for the most part , this opposition is related to the timing of the bill rather than to the principle of a valley - wide approach to resource management and environmental assessment . 
their preference , as I understand it , would be that Bill C - 6 not apply to their regions until after agreements have been reached on their land claims . 
i wish to assure honourable senators that Bill C - 6 is not being imposed unduly upon any aboriginal group . 
the new regime will not prejudice the negotiation of future land claims or self - government agreements . 
it will not abrogate nor derogate in any way from the aboriginal or treaty rights protected by section 35 of the Constitution . 
guarantees to this effect are included in the legislation . 
in fact , the new regime will give First Nations better representation and participation in decision - making processes than they have today . 
bill C - 6 will guarantee First Nations people equal representation on the two valley - wide boards , including First Nations that have not yet signed land claims agreements . 
this will empower aboriginal peoples in the Mackenzie Valley to protect their traditional activities while supporting and benefiting from other forms of economic development . 
at the same time , Bill C - 6 ensures that the voices of non - aboriginal residents of the Northwest Territories will be heard , both through representation on the valley - wide boards and through the public hearings and consultations provided for by Bill C - 6 . 
honourable senators , we expect this to be a working example of resource co - management and good public governments in the north . 
it is also an example of how the current government is fulfilling the objectives of the policy publication , " Gathering Strength , Canada ' s Aboriginal Action Plan . " 
that paper is one of the government ' s responses to the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples , which recommended a co - management regime in the Mackenzie Valley . 
this legislation is also consistent with the government ' s ongoing efforts to move decision - making and political accountability to the North . 
as I noted at the outset , honourable senators , this legislation has been the subject of an extensive consultation process . 
thirty - five drafts of the bill have been developed and distributed for comment and review . 
dozens of meetings have been held with aboriginal leaders , the territorial government , the resource industries and the public . 
these consultations have resulted in a number of amendments that have strengthened the bill and widened the involvement of aboriginal peoples in the resource co - management regime . 
such a process would not have been possible without the cooperation and commitment of many people . 
i should like to mention some of the key players who have worked together to make Bill C - 6 a reality . 
they include the leaders of the Gwitch ' in and Sahtu Dene and the M é tis people , who signed their land claims agreements in 1992 and 1994 respectively . 
these individuals have worked closely with the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development and federal officials to fulfil both the spirit and the letter of these agreements . 
the Government of the Northwest Territories has also played a central role in creating a strong but flexible resource co - management regime in the Mackenzie Valley . 
the territorial government ' s objective has been to achieve an approach that reflects today ' s needs and circumstances , including the need for aboriginal people to participate fully and effectively in decision - making . 
resource industry companies and associations have also contributed to Bill C - 6 . 
the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development also deserves special mention for successfully accommodating the interests of many diverse stakeholders without sacrificing the effectiveness or responsiveness of the new regime . 
finally , I want to commend the Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development . 
after holding public hearings on Bill C - 6 last December , the committee moved several amendments that have made this a stronger bill . 
honourable senators , these various groups have come together to craft a piece of legislation which we believe to be balanced , workable and effective . 
the time and effort taken to do this has put us two years beyond the time by which it was expected to pass through Parliament . 
we believe , however , that the time and effort was well spent because Bill C - 6 is now widely recognized as being a fair and workable solution to the complex challenge of preserving the environment , fostering economic development and respecting the rights and traditions of aboriginal people . 
with that in mind , I ask honourable senators to support this legislation so that we can refer it to committee for consideration , and thus move it expeditiously through the third and final reading . 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator De Ban é , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier , for the second reading of Bill C - 9 , for making the system of Canadian ports competitive , efficient and commercially oriented , providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports , for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I rise today to speak to Bill C - 9 in this second reading debate . 
before I do so , I wish to be permitted to extend to leaders on the government side and on our side my sincere appreciation for their having accommodated me with respect to this bill , and staying it until today , the first opportunity I have had to address it . 
honourable senators , many of you may know that a subcommittee of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , which comprises five members , including the chairman of the full standing committee , have been away for approximately two or three weeks on a fact - finding mission , looking at transportation as it exists today , where it seems to be going in the next few years and , as well , where it should be in the year 2020 or 2025 . 
no doubt you will be hearing more about that report as we move closer to bringing it before the chamber . 
today we have Bill C - 9 before us , the proposed Canada Marine Act . 
this is essentially the same bill , with some changes , as Bill C - 44 , which died on the Order Paper of the Senate at the call of the last federal election . 
while Bill C - 44 spent some time before the House of Commons Standing Committee on Transport , the government was severely criticized by this side for trying to rush it through the Senate last April with minimal hearings , scrutiny or consultation . 
one of the main criticisms of Bill C - 44 and of Bill C - 9 is the way it deals with the group of ports which could be called and are becoming known as " significant regional ports , " ports which will be divested over the next six years . 
this bill will have a tremendous impact on the communities involved , not to mention adjoining communities . 
the regional communities affected by such ports and their business activity have not been consulted with respect to future change . 
senator Cochrane raised the issue of lack of consultation in the spring of last year . 
bill Casey , the Member of Parliament for Cumberland - Colchester raised the issue as well in the other place . 
we still have had no consultation . 
the government refused to allow the transport committee in the other place to call witnesses other than government officials . 
that seems rather strange . 
honourable senators , I hope the situation will be somewhat different in the Senate . 
this matter is too important to be dealt with quickly . 
evidence should be heard not only from the structured support staff in the Department of Transport . 
the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications - to which I hope this bill can be referred quickly - will , I trust , spend the time that is necessary to hear those who are most seriously affected by Bill C - 9 . 
the proposed Canada Marine Act is a complicated bill dealing with many varied aspects of maritime life in Canada . 
it comes before us at a time when many of the major ports in Canada are under siege . 
questions are being raised , almost on a daily basis , regarding our ports , our port management and port policing authorities . 
for example , is there anyone here who has not had a call about port police and their struggle against organized crime ? 
organized crime grows more sophisticated every day . 
while the clauses of this bill confer upon whatever new policing authority takes over , powers which are needed to deal with substandard shipping , I question the wisdom of disbanding port police forces at this time . 
for those who may be interested , we now have a common , core structure for policing in our significant ports in Canada in that it is a national organization . 
the disbandment of this system relegates policing activity to municipal police forces , or where applicable , the RCMP or other provincial police forces . 
this means that every port will be subject to a different set of laws with respect to the never - ending battle against organized crime . 
this training has been carried out in conjunction with our national police forces and with the local , municipal or provincial police establishment , whatever the case may be . 
the committee wishes to review this whole question . 
we wish to call witnesses . 
we wish to hear from those who have served in the port policing structure nationally and at the port level over the last several years . 
another main thrust of the bill is to classify our ports . 
the government is dividing all ports into three classes : major commercial ports that are financially viable ; the regional ports , of which I spoke earlier , which are being divested over the next five or six years ; and remote ports , for which no change is contemplated and which will continue to be supported by the federal government . 
honourable senators , the long title of Bill C - 9 includes the words : " An Act for making the system of Canadian ports competitive , efficient and commercially oriented ... " 
while this may be an admirable goal for the Ports of Vancouver , Halifax or Montreal , it does not give the other ports the necessary wherewithal , including statutory authority , to act in contemplation of becoming profitable or efficient , and all the other things which this act finds desirable and with which I am sure all of us would agree . 
while the government claims it is establishing a system to divest itself of certain ports , it does so in a way that keeps the government deeply involved and limits the future financial viability of the major ports themselves . 
clause 28 ( 1 ) of Bill C - 9 states : 
a port authority ... for the purposes of this Act , has the powers of a natural person . 
however , the powers of the ports themselves have been limited . 
the directors of the board of the ports are predominantly appointed , if not entirely , by Governor in Council . 
no consultation is required and even though criteria are set out for the selection of directors , it is up to the Governor in Council to determine whether or not these criteria have been met . 
again , by virtue of clause 39 : 
clause 37 ( 5 ) provides that financial statements are to include : 
... information about any contingent liabilities of the port authority or of its wholly - owned subsidiaries . 
a special examination of the port authorities records can be carried out at any time that the minister may request , according to clause 41 ( 2 ) . 
while the port authority may fix user fees , there is an appeal procedure if a user objects and the federal Crown itself is not precluded from submitting an objection . 
these are the restrictions on the ability of the port authority to operate as a natural person . 
indeed , these are restrictions that cannot be placed upon a natural person . 
again , we want to look closely at these areas . 
honourable senators , these restrictions might be viewed as more palatable . 
the port authority had access to the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada for borrowing purposes or , alternatively , for government guaranteed loans . 
however , both these avenues for financing are expressly prohibited by the bill . 
therefore , we argue that these clauses are restrictive . 
the only way the port authority can offer security for borrowed money is to pledge the revenues of the property occupied by the port under clause 31 ( 3 ) . 
it is expressly prohibited by this clause from mortgaging , pledging or creating a security interest on the federal property it occupies and manages . 
one must wonder how far apart the committees which wrote that sentence sat to come up with that wording . 
these restrictions , honourable senators , will severely hurt ports which desire to expand or improve their facilities . 
the federal government , through this bill , has prohibited access to funds and has prohibited itself from being an equity partner or investor in port expansion . 
this measure will particularly hurt the Port of Halifax , which now has plans to expand its facilities on a large scale . 
an expansion is necessary if the Port of Halifax is to play its role - and that is a major role - in the shipment of goods from the heartland of Europe to the mid - North American consumption areas , or land - bridged through to Asia , and returning by that route . 
much must be done to make that possible . 
the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communication must spend some time attempting to determine the effect of this bill on the regional ports that are so directly affected by the proposed legislation . 
while the purpose of bill is that these ports would be transferred or sold into private ownership , the minister still retains the right to appoint whomever he pleases to the position of harbour - master or wharfinger under clause 69 . 
one would have thought , as the millennium approaches , that harbour - masters and wharfingers might have found some other method of keeping active . 
we all know the story of the wharfinger in Lunenburg and Lloyd Crouse . 
i wish I had the time to relate it because it is a tale of power , and the inability of people with power to know how to use that power . 
senator Moore has heard the story . 
he said , " Lloyd , my boy , you may have the authority to name that wharfinger and replace me , but you are too damn stupid to know how to do it . " 
that must change . 
that was the last century , the last millennium . 
these are things that we should be studying . 
in addition , there is no consultation mechanism in the bill in order that there might be public discussion of things such as port fees , top wharfage charges and harbour charges generally . 
i believe , honourable senators - and I feel that many of you also believe - that the impact of these changes on medium - sized , regional ports must be examined in some detail . 
changes to the local port or the wharf will affect virtually everyone in the adjacent municipalities . 
at the very least , we need to look carefully at the economic impact of these proposed changes . 
this bill also deals with the proposed commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway . 
it authorizes the minister to enter into agreements with not - for - profit corporations to run the seaway , basically . 
the minister also has broad regulation - making powers which include the right to transfer property . 
we will have a not - for - profit organization , yet the minister will retain the right to usurp that function and take it under his own advisement . 
that brings us , of course , to the argument of a level playing field . 
if access to the Consolidated Revenue Fund is available to those operating the seaway , why , for example , can the Port of Halifax not at least obtain a guarantee to back the loans it needs for expansion and growth ? 
it is not just the Port of Halifax , it is all the other ports in that category in Canada - 15 or 16 of them . 
i am also concerned that we should ensure that Canada is not acting in breach of any of its international obligations in relation to these proposals for the seaway . 
i am especially concerned that we should determine whether the statement made in clause 100 is accurate . 
clause 100 states : 
the appropriate authority in the United States in respect of the Seaway has the powers necessary to enable it to act , in Canada , jointly or in conjunction with the Minister or with any person who has entered into an agreement under subsection 80 ( 5 ) . 
i think we should have this confirmation directly from officials of the United States in order to be absolutely certain that the intent of that wording is understood and acceptable to our partners in the seaway business . 
the bill also deals with pilotage . 
the Subcommittee on Transportation Safety has heard from every pilotage authority in Canada , and from some of Canada ' s major marine services . 
i believe I can say without fear of contradiction that most are pleased with the pilotage services offered in Canada . 
while I realize that the government does not want this to be a money - losing proposition , I think we should be very careful with any changes that are being proposed to the system . 
finally , honourable senators , I return to the issue of port police . 
this bill seeks to disband them and , at the same time , proposes no alternative . 
it casts them adrift at the mercy of varying law agencies in this country . 
we should tread carefully with any changes in this area at the present time . 
honourable senators , I look forward to a full discussion of this matter in committee . 
we owe it to the port community to make sure that that which was not done a year or so ago is , in fact , done now so that we do not have to come back in the year 2001 or 2002 with major amendments because of oversight resulting from a lack of consultation at this point in time . 
with those few remarks , let me say that we on this side wish to see this bill referred to the appropriate committee , namely , the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
hon. John G . Bryden : 
honourable senators , Senator De Ban é ' s clear and concise description of the substance and principles of Bill C - 9 was complete , and needs no amplification from me . 
i also wish to say , before I get into my text , that I share a number of the concerns that Senator Forrestall has raised , and also look forward to hearing evidence in our committee . 
in general , I welcome the government ' s initiative to improve our marine transportation system . 
from what I have read so far - and I look forward to learning more in committee - this change will be a step in the right direction for these ports . 
however , there is concern about the proposed treatment of the small or so - called local and regional ports under the bill and the National Marine Policy that the bill would implement . 
from what I have been able to determine , this part of the bill and policy has received far less focus and attention than the other elements of the marine initiative . 
little , if any , analysis has been directed to the impact this bill and its policy will have on the socio - economic development of communities and regions dependent on these local and regional commercial ports . 
very little of the extensive testimony heard in committee in the other place on this bill related to local and regional ports . 
i hope we in this chamber , and especially in committee , can be more thorough in this regard and examine these issues closely with all due care . 
having lived in Atlantic Canada almost all of my life , I am very conscious of the central role played by the local ports in communities throughout the region . 
they are much more than a body of water and one or more wharves . 
in many cases , they are the economic lifeblood of a community or an entire region . 
our region is called the Maritimes and Atlantic Canada for good reason : 
we have always had close ties to the sea , and those ties continue today . 
bill C - 9 and the national marine policy it would implement would usher in a new regime whereby all but a few of the very largest and busiest ports across the country would be transferred from the federal government to local interests or would face closure . 
many people are concerned that , even with the port assistance fund to aid in the transfer , many of our ports will not be able to achieve continuing financial self - sufficiency and , ultimately , will close . 
this is a radical change for my region of the country , honourable senators . 
i believe that this will fundamentally change the face of many communities in Atlantic Canada . 
i recognize that change is not always bad . 
the fact that throughout our history many of our communities have shipped and received goods by sea does not mean that we should do so forevermore . 
if it is time to change , and that change will enhance the economic vitality of the areas and the communities , then this may , indeed , be the best policy , and Bill C - 9 may be the best way to implement that policy . 
i am eager to hear the witnesses on the bill and to be convinced that this is indeed the right thing to do for Atlantic Canadian communities now . 
at the moment , honourable senators , there are a number of questions that need to be answered . 
i will highlight a few of my concerns . 
paragraph ( d ) of that declaration states : 
transportation is recognized as a key to regional economic development and that commercial viability of transportation links is balanced with regional economic development objectives so that the potential economic strengths of each region maybe realized . 
this was not a new provision . 
it was present in the declaration of the national transportation policy found in the old National Transportation Act . 
in other words , honourable senators , this is a long - standing , fundamental tenet of Canadian transportation policy and is still a valid expression of our national transportation policy . 
nothing in Bill C - 9 would repeal or amend that section . 
part of our job , then , is to ensure that the national marine policy , and especially Bill C - 9 , are true to that national transportation policy . 
i am concerned that the bill and the policy are too heavily weighted in favour of commercial viability , in fact ignoring regional economic development objectives , and that the result may be that the potential economic strengths of certain regions - the Atlantic region in particular - will be frustrated rather than realized . 
as far as I have been able to learn , the policy of divestiture of local regional ports referred to in clause 4 ( g ) of Bill C - 9 was adopted without any studies having been prepared on the social and economic impact of that policy on the communities where these ports are located . 
quite simply , we do not know what will happen . 
we do not know how many ports will be forced to close as a result of this policy , and we do not know what will happen to the businesses that presently receive or ship goods from those ports . 
we do not know what other spin - off businesses will suffer if the businesses are forced to locate closer to open ports or other means of affordable transportation . 
quite simply , I am not sure that we know what we are setting in motion with this policy for regional and local commercial ports . 
honourable senators , I hope I am wrong . 
i hope that when the officials who prepared this bill and are responsible for the policy appear before the Senate committee they will be able to show us extensive studies that put my concerns to rest . 
however , as far as I can determine , no such studies have been produced to date . 
there are other concerns as well . 
the bill seems to set up a two - tiered transportation policy : one for most of the ports that sets a tough standard requiring that each port be financially self - sufficient and either make it on its own , with no government help , or face closure ; and another very different policy for the St. Lawrence Seaway that promotes but does not require management in a commercial manner and allows for government financial support . 
honourable senators , the bill contains two very different sets of stated objectives : one called the National Marine Policy , set out in clause 4 of the bill ; and the other for the seaway , which is set out in clause 78 . 
i was surprised to see several objectives of the seaway that do not appear for the rest of the marine infrastructure in the country . 
clause 78 states an objective of the bill to be to " protect the rights and interests of communities adjacent to the Seaway . " 
that is an excellent objective but one that surely should apply equally to communities adjacent to ports throughout the country . 
on what basis do we single out communities in one part of the country from the many others that are concerned about this new ports policy ? 
what special protection would they receive under the bill and why ? 
clause 78 states another objective of the bill to be to : 
( d ) protect the long - term operation and viability of the Seaway as an integral part of Canada ' s national transportation infrastructure . 
in fact , a recent article in the Wall Street Journal , which was reprinted in The Globe and Mail , said that the St. Lawrence Seaway , " long hailed as an engineering marvel , has turned into a surprising disappointment . " 
the article noted that : 
further , the ships being built and used today simply do not fit in the seaway . 
they are too big . 
the article goes on to say : 
seaway officials estimated that it would take $ 4 billion to $ 5 billion U.S. to expand the system to accommodate the new generation of cargo boats now plying the oceans . 
but pessimists note that neither the United States nor Canada is eager to come up with the cash to expand the waterway ' s locks and canals . 
if our concern is to ensure that our national marine system is cost effective , competitive and financially self - sufficient , should we be so quick to single out the seaway for special treatment ? 
the bill would afford the seaway a number of critical privileges expressly denied elsewhere throughout the country . 
for example , section 25 would explicitly prohibit any parliamentary appropriation for a payment to a Canada Port Authority - the new structure for the major ports - to enable it to discharge an obligation or a liability . 
by contrast , sections 80 and 81 would allow the Minister of Transport to agree to make financial contributions or grants , or give other financial assistance in respect of all or part of the seaway , and provide that such amounts are payable out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund . 
honourable senators , perhaps the bill ' s approach to the seaway has it right . 
perhaps our national marine infrastructure , a critical part of the fabric of our nation , should receive extra help and support , including financial support from the federal government . 
in that case , however , I believe we must be fair and even - handed . 
those of us from Atlantic Canada know very well that our ports are a critical part of the fabric of our region , and therefore of the country . 
certainly , they are important to our region , no less than the seaway is to Central Canada . 
indeed , if it is acceptable to have a two - tier policy , does it not make sense to apply the same supportive community and regional development policies that will assure the viability of the communities on the seaway to the local and regional ports in Atlantic Canada , in order to enhance and encourage the economic viability of local and regional communities there ? 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I regret to interrupt , but the honourable senator ' s time has expired . 
is leave granted to allow the Honourable Senator Bryden to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Bryden : 
i have a number of technical questions about the bill as well . 
i have been informed that the policy of divestiture has already begun to be implemented , and that Bill C - 9 is not necessary to implement that policy . 
senator Forrestall : 
they always say that . 
senator Bryden : 
i know . 
i want to hear more about that aspect so that I can understand the context under which this policy is now proceeding . 
as I read the existing statutes , the authorization to de - proclaim ports and public harbours is quite limited in scope . 
honourable senators , how does this authorize a divestiture of a port to someone who will tear it down or use it for something else ? 
how does this authorize the closure of a port when it specifically authorizes only a termination for the purpose of improving the administration of the port or facility ? 
i look forward to receiving the facts and figures that I am sure the Department of Transport officials had in arriving at this figure , in order to be confident that it will do an adequate job . 
prior to now , the government has spent about $ 40 million annually on local and regional ports , and still it has not been enough to keep them in good repair . 
this figure of $ 125 million over six years is equivalent to less than half of that amount , and only for a period of six years . 
how can this possibly be enough to allow the ports to stand on their own feet and face the future on their own ? 
i have a number of questions about the safety and environmental protection at our ports and harbours after divestiture . 
if we no longer have federal officials at our ports and harbours , how will we be able to enforce our laws and ensure our ports are safe and environmentally protected ? 
in 1990 , the Brander - Smith report alerted us to the risks of environmental catastrophe at our ports , and singled out Atlantic Canada as facing the highest risk of oil spills . 
they went on to say : 
the overwhelming majority of tanker accidents are caused by human error . 
despite this , competitive pressures have reduced manning of vessels to dangerously low levels and made quick port turnarounds a growing priority . 
honourable senators , with this new marine policy , the competitive pressures will only increase . 
however , now we will not only have dangerously low levels of manning on the vessels , but we will also have dangerously low levels of manning in the ports . 
what constraint will there be on shipping companies ? 
if there is a problem , who will be on the scene to prevent ships from simply slipping out of the harbour and leaving our jurisdiction ? 
honourable senators , I have many other questions and concerns about this bill , including the issue of policing and drug smuggling , but I will leave them for the committee hearings . 
my objective , like all of us , is to ensure that we have the very best possible marine policy . 
i grew up on a farm next to the sea , and that is where I live today . 
the sea is a vital part of every Maritimer , and the ports are the core of many of our communities . 
this is not a question of sentiment or nostalgia . 
our ports are still a critical part of our economic infrastructure . 
our part of the country has suffered a great deal in recent years , not only because of the collapse of the fishery , but also through the disproportionate impact of government restructuring . 
we have worked hard to establish and build our agricultural , forestry , manufacturing and other exporting businesses , many of which rely upon our ports . 
with this policy or lack of a policy for local commercial ports , are we confident that we know what we are doing ; that these businesses and the communities that built them and rely upon them can continue to survive and thrive ? 
to date , I have seen no positive answers to this question . 
such an approach is not only consistent with but perhaps made necessary by the Canada Transportation Act , which sets out our national transportation policy . 
i should like to close by quoting section 5 ( d ) again : 
transportation is recognized as a key to regional economic development and that commercial viability of transportation links is balanced with regional economic development objectives so that the potential economic strengths of each region may be realized . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
would the honourable senator respond to a couple of questions ? 
senator Bryden : 
Yes. 
senator Kinsella : 
could Senator Bryden make some application of some of the principles in his excellent and very important address just delivered ? 
given that one of the major activities between those two ports speaks directly to the transportation , not only of goods but passengers , would the honourable senator apply some of the issues he raised to those two ports and explicate a little further some of the problems which might apply or that he has in the back of his mind ? 
senator Bryden : 
i will try . 
that port is expected to stand on its own . 
the honourable senator has referred to the ferry service that runs back and forth . 
i do not know the answer to that situation . 
i know there has been some speculation , and certainly it is something we should determine , that because of the situation in Digby the ferries there will likely end up being privatized . 
i do not believe they are at the present time . 
senator Forrestall : 
they are private . 
senator Bryden : 
they are ? 
i do not know how you would support the Port of Digby . 
presumably it must be supported by something . 
that may be what is causing the major problem . 
there just is not enough information . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , Senator Bryden has raised very important concerns . 
i particularly wish to refer to Senator Bryden ' s analysis of the bill . 
we wish to discover what kind of economic analysis was done on those smaller ports , for example , to particularize , the Port of Bayside , or the Port of St. Andrews in the province of New Brunswick , or the Port of Yarmouth , Nova Scotia , or the many ports around the Island of Newfoundland . 
did I understand the honourable senator correctly , that the portion of the bill that deals with the St. Lawrence Seaway appears to have been well crafted with regard to economic considerations , whereas little attention has been paid to the impact on the smaller ports , such as those I have mentioned ? 
would the honourable senator speak a little further to the practical impact of the policy that underlies this bill , the adverse impact that it could have on ports like Bayside or Yarmouth or these smaller ports ? 
senator Bryden : 
i will be brief because I know I am way over my time . 
i am not aware of the situation in the ports the honourable senator specifically referred to , but I can give some other examples that are comparable . 
for example , let me take the two ports on the Miramichi , Newcastle and Chatham . 
Repap in Newcastle receives the clay for their clay - coated paper by boat right now . 
much of the oil and gasoline for that whole area comes into Chatham to Ultramar and other sources . 
at the moment , it appears as though both those ports will close , and those materials will have to find their way , if indeed they continue to come there , by other means . 
if they come by road , then of course they will come by 18 - wheel tanker , and we all know what tankers do to highways , particularly at this time of year . 
it has significant implications . 
the major factor here is the implications for the surrounding communities . 
a port that is not self - sufficient , or that is simply the place where the lumber or produce gets shipped out will not stand on its own as a profitable entity . 
however , it is the end point of a huge amount of economic activity that goes on all around the region . What 
will happen ? 
the worst example is Prince Edward Island . 
prince Edward Island will have no port . 
immediately Transport Canada people will say that is not true , that they will still have ports but they will not be managed by Transport Canada . 
as I understand it , the Ports of Charlottetown , Summerside , Souris and Georgetown may be four ports too many . 
for goodness sake , surely one or two make some degree of sense . 
the Transport Canada people will say that they will provide money from that $ 125 - million transfer fund . 
the concern of many of us - and Senator Callbeck can speak for herself - is that that may be an end play . 
the nearest analysis I can give is that for Maritimers it is like buying back the fishing licence . 
you pay one shot and you are done . 
you pay your $ 2 million towards Summerside and once that has gone , the federal government has discharged its responsibility for that port . 
the concern is whether they will be viable afterwards . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Angus , debate adjourned . 
post - Secondary Education 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the consideration of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , tabled in the Senate on December 16 , 1997 . - ( 
honourable Senator Forest ) . 
hon. Jean B . Forest : 
honourable senators , I am pleased today to have the opportunity to address the subject of post - secondary education in Canada and , more particularly , the report tabled during the last session of the Senate . 
as you will recall , this study into the serious state of post - secondary education in Canada was initiated by Senator Lorne Bonnell in June 1996 , just one month after my appointment to the Senate . 
senator Bonnell invited me to sit on the subcommittee which was to delve into the situation and , given my long - term interest and involvement in post - secondary education , I was delighted to accept . 
at the time the committee was established , those involved in post - secondary education were extremely concerned about the decreased level of funding causing what they perceived to be the declining quality of education within the post - secondary sector . 
on the other hand , there did not appear to be widespread concern on the part of the general public . 
over the ensuing months , however , that concern has risen to a level which even Senator Bonnell might not have anticipated . 
i commend him for his foresight in recognizing this emerging issue and for the initiatives he took to set up the committee and arrange for the cross - country hearings which provided for the widespread level of input required to capture the attention of the Canadian public and , I venture to say , that of the government . 
since Senator Bonnell and several committee members have already given excellent presentations on various aspects of the report of the committee , I will simply highlight my personal impressions of the working of the committee , the more significant information and insights garnered through the public hearings , and the personal contacts made and responses to the recommendations which resulted from our findings . 
as a newly appointed member of the Senate , this was my first experience in serving on a committee engaged in public hearings outside of Ottawa , and I wish to report that it was a very positive one . 
i was impressed with the travelling arrangements made for us , and the preparatory research done by the clerk and other staff members to facilitate our work . 
i was impressed by the background and commitment demonstrated by my Senate colleagues , and by the positive working relationships which developed during our time spent together as committee members . 
i was particularly impressed with the quality of the presentations made by the members of the many diverse groups who participated in the public hearings . 
for me , one of the most interesting aspects of those public hearings was the way in which practically all of the stakeholders in the post - secondary sector , along with the institutions which service the student loans , seemed to be singing from the same song sheet with respect to the problems they were experiencing , and recommendations for the changes which were perceived to be required in order to improve the state of post - secondary education in Canada . 
in all of the years in which I have been involved in the field , I have not encountered that before , namely , substantial agreement between students , faculty members , staff , administrators , lending institutions and the Department of Human Resources , not only upon what ailed post - secondary education but also upon a prescription to ensure its recovery . 
the second thing that interested me - indeed , intrigued me - was a call from stakeholders in every province , except Quebec , for a stronger national presence in post - secondary education . 
this occurred despite the fact that , at the outset of every meeting , the chairman stressed the fact that committee members were keenly conscious of the fact that education fell within provincial jurisdiction , and that we did not want to usurp that authority . 
concerned , however , about the lack of national goals and standards , and about difficulties with respect to student mobility and accessibility , repeated calls came for different ways and means of strengthening the national presence in post - secondary education . 
even the stakeholders from Quebec , who were generally opposed to any kind of federal intervention , agreed that there might be room for a national role in areas of facilitation and coordination - provided , of course , that the provincial ministers were in agreement . 
many witnesses noted that few countries were without such national principles and goals in education and that , in the context of today ' s global knowledge - based society , Canada would not be able to remain competitive without such principles and goals to form the foundation and chart the future for a post - secondary system which could become our flagship in the new millennium . 
in a number of instances , the list of five principles upon which the health care system is based was cited as an example of the kind of national signal needed in Canada if our post - secondary education system is to focus upon the level of excellence required to carry us into the next century . 
while I found the country - wide consensus on this issue interesting , I found equally interesting the wide range of diversity within the system , among the universities , colleges , and technical schools scattered across the country - each with its own unique mission and mandate , and each responding to the particular needs of the community within which it is situated - working together to provide a post - secondary system of education that may well be second to none . 
we learned that , in Canada , we have the world ' s highest per capita rate of participation in post - secondary education . 
we were encouraged to learn of advances being made in the area of post - secondary educational opportunities for francophone , aboriginal and disabled students . 
we were pleased , also , to learn of progress in the field of international education and instructional technology . 
it was also gratifying to learn of new initiatives being undertaken , through partnerships forged between educational institutions and private industry , to provide more opportunities for learning in the workplace , along with provisions for prior learning assessment and recognition of such training to further the career of those involved in programs offered in the workplace . 
all that having been said , while the structure for such a system has been put in place and well developed , the level of funding needed to support it has not kept pace with the growing demand for these diverse educational services . 
indeed , funding had decreased and has given cause for widespread concern and , in some cases , alarm over the decline in the quality of education being offered to the students . 
we were also told at every hearing of the serious financial plight experienced by a growing number of students who , because of increased tuition fees and the lack of summer and part - time jobs , were burdened with a debt load so heavy that it was discouraging some of them from continuing their education , and in some cases even discouraging some from enrolling . 
as we travelled across the country , we heard many presentations calling for improvements to the system of loans and grants for students in need of financial assistance . 
we heard many complaints indicating the serious effects of the financial cut - backs at both the federal and provincial levels , upon teaching and research , and the infrastructure needed to carry them out . 
we heard many warnings about the way in which our level of scholarship and research , and hence our competitiveness on the global scene , was being compromised by the lack of financial resources , which was causing the brain drain of our brightest and best scholars and researchers to our neighbour to the south and to countries abroad . 
we were heartened to hear of the government ' s plan to address the issue of student finance , and to establish the Canadian Foundation for Innovation , an $ 800 - million foundation geared mainly toward funding for university research , especially in health , the environment , science and engineering . 
we had reason to believe that the publicity which followed the public hearings across the country had , to some extent , raised the level of public concern , and this was not lost on the private sector , which has shown increased signs of willingness to become involved in partnerships with institutions of higher learning , nor was it lost on government . 
announcements in the most recent budget have heightened committee members ' sense of optimism with respect to the state of post - secondary education in Canada . 
those will be available for both full and part - time studies . 
honourable senators , if , as we believe , the public hearings which we conducted and the recommendations made by the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education have played even a minor role in raising the public ' s awareness of the serious situation which existed in this sector , and if we have contributed even in a small way to persuading the educational institutions , the private sector and the government to address the concerns raised , then the committee has fulfilled its function . 
referring to a copy of the Senate report which was sent to her , Dr. Martha Piper , the president of Canada ' s second largest university wrote : 
i have read it carefully and found it to be an excellent summary of the issues and challenges . 
i believe you have truly captured the system and what we must do to ensure its continuing success . 
the budget clearly addresses many of the issues in the report . 
as a relatively new senator , I am very proud of the work we do here . 
i would hope that longer - serving senators , somewhat jaded , perhaps , by the bad press we have received of late , would feel equally proud of the valuable contributions which they have made over the years . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this order is considered debated . 
scrutiny of Regulations 
consideration of Second Report of Standing Joint Committee - Order Withdrawn 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Joint Committee for the Scrutiny of Regulations ( Royal Canadian Mounted Police Regulations ( 1988 ) ) , tabled in the Senate on February 26 , 1998 . 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , I ask that consideration of this report be withdrawn from the Order Paper because the report was tabled for consultation purposes only and not for discussion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Ghitter calling the attention of the Senate to the concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution : ( a ) its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; ( b ) alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; ( c ) the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire to see equal numbers of Senators representing each province ; ( d ) the length of term of office ; ( e ) the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level ; and ( f ) the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . - ( 
honourable Senator Lucier ) . 
hon. Paul Lucier : 
honourable senators , I wish to begin my remarks by thanking Senator Ghitter for bringing forth this inquiry on the Senate . 
i may not agree with Senator Ghitter ' s conclusions , but I do feel , as he does , that as senators we should be putting our views on record at this time . 
at decent intervals , we need to engage in the critical examination of our role in public life and in governance , both with an eye to how we work today and to meaningful , long - term reform . 
honourable senators , I have a copy of the report of the Special Joint Committee on Senate Reform tabled in both Houses of Parliament in January of 1984 , although most of the committee hearings were held in 1983 , 15 years ago . 
the special joint committee was ably co - chaired by our friend and present Speaker , Senator Gildas Molgat , and by Paul Cosgrove , now a judge , a former MP and as nice a person as you could hope to meet . 
i am proud to say that I was a member of that committee from the start . 
we even managed to have a public meeting in Whitehorse . 
while in Whitehorse , I was able to host the committee to an Alaska king crab dinner in my home . 
the first line of the report reads as follows : 
we have concluded that the Canadian Senate should be elected directly by the people of Canada . 
i do not try to claim credit for many things in this chamber , but I fought not only for those words to be included , but that they be the first words of the report . 
fifteen years later , I feel exactly the same way , and I have never wavered . 
i have been truly honoured to work with so many great Canadians during my 22 years in this chamber , including - but certainly not limited to - former premiers , mayors , professors , doctors , and even the odd fire - fighter from the Yukon . 
in my opinion , the Senate of Canada has been served by the finest group of Canadians society could produce , and many of you are still here today . 
i am honoured to be in your presence . 
honourable senators , we and our families have had a rough ride since Senator Thompson ' s attendance record became a lightning - rod for criticism of the Senate by the press and by that undisciplined and superficial group of clowns who call themselves the official opposition in the other place . 
what a sorry bunch ! 
can honourable senators imagine , in their wildest dreams , that such a cynical , unparliamentary , uncontrolled bunch of media hounds would aspire to form the next government ? 
it is difficult to believe that such a party could be led by the son of one of our most distinguished former colleagues , Senator Ernest Manning . 
senator Ernest Manning spent many years in the Alberta legislature and also served as premier of that province . 
did anyone question his ethics or accuse him of any foul deeds when he accepted a Senate appointment from Prime Minister Trudeau ? 
where was the mariachi band and the convertible - riding , flag - waving buffoons from the Reform Party when Senator Manning became a member of this chamber ? 
senator Manning spent 13 years in this chamber , and often sat at our Senate dining - room table . 
it was my pleasure to share many meals with him , and to hear his views on a number of subjects concerning the people of Alberta . 
senator Manning was a true gentleman and statesman . 
he made a contribution to Canadian public life as a member of the Alberta legislature , as Alberta ' s premier , and as a senator of Canada . 
to have his son , who aspires to be prime minister of the country , lead such a vicious , personal attack on this institution , and the people who are appointed to the Senate such as Senator Fitzpatrick and Senator Johnstone , is nothing short of hypocritical , in my opinion . 
many of us spent years as elected politicians . 
people such as Senators Doody , Berntson , Prud ' homme , Corbin , Louis and Fernand Robichaud , St. Germain , and Buchanan , have nothing to learn from the Reform Party about running for public office or serving as elected members of legislatures at the municipal , provincial or federal levels . 
in their wisdom , and after much deliberation , the Fathers of Confederation chose an appointed Senate . 
they chose an elected house , an appointed Senate and a Governor General to form the Parliament of Canada . 
what was likely the only acceptable solution at that time should , in my opinion , be revisited . 
senate reform has been everyone ' s favourite goal since shortly after Confederation . 
the Senate has been the favourite whipping boy of many politicians from the other place , yet true , meaningful Senate reform has not yet occurred . 
the only people who are opposed to an elected Senate , in my opinion , are the premiers . 
that is strange , since they are the ones who could amend the Constitution and make the Senate an elected chamber . 
their fear , of course , is that a truly elected Senate would automatically replace premiers as regional representatives in Ottawa . 
they want to be the only ones to speak on behalf of their provinces and regions of Canada . 
they are guarding their power base . 
the model being proposed by the Reform Party and the Premier of Alberta would be an absolute disaster . 
the newly elected appointee would not be accountable to the people who voted , would not even have to speak to them again - ever - would not be censured for not putting forth the views of Albertans , and would have tenure until he or she turns 75 , just like the rest of us . 
let us put that plan in the garbage and get on with a truly elected Senate . 
replace the present absolute veto with a suspensive veto , give senators one nine - year term , have them elected on a regional basis , and then let us stop kidding ourselves about a non - partisan Senate . 
why would you want a group of non - partisans , whatever that means , elected to a partisan chamber ? 
politics is how we do things in the real world . 
have you ever heard of a non - partisan education system or a non - partisan health organization or sports organization ? 
are the Olympics , law societies , accounting firms , et cetera , non - partisan ? 
having the senior political body in Canada function as non - political would be quite a trick . 
i learned more about politics in hockey and in religion than I did in the Senate . 
politics is how we do things . 
my vision of the new Senate would be a group of elected senators who belong to parties of their choice but who would come together on regional issues . 
it is not a new concept , honourable senators . 
municipal governments have been doing it for years . 
hence , Senate reform , resulting in a truly elected , effective and equal Senate , is desirable . 
it is feasible and it is possible if we , as politicians and Canadians in general , really want to make it happen . 
the status quo - primarily the fact that we are appointed , not elected - while totally legitimate , will always deprive us of acceptance by the people we serve , regardless of how hard we work , how good that work is , or what our attendance might be . 
will an elected Senate cure all our political and constitutional problems ? 
not a chance . 
let me turn my comments from Senate reform to what we can do now to make our role more meaningful - as Senator Ghitter put it , more effective , more useful and more viable . 
Ontario has 124 members of Parliament , including 24 senators . 
the Yukon has two , including one senator . 
until my appointment in 1975 , the Yukon had never been represented in this chamber . 
i am honoured to be the first senator to represent the Yukon . 
i am pleased that , in 1975 , we doubled Yukon ' s representation in Ottawa . 
i have had the honour of speaking on behalf of many people in the Yukon who never had a voice in Ottawa . 
as deputy chairman of the Liberal national caucus for four years , with my good friend House Speaker Gib Parent as chairman , I had weekly access to the Prime Minister , cabinet ministers and committee chairpersons . 
i fought long and hard for the Yukon on the Meech Lake and Charlottetown Accords . 
thanks to my intervention and the understanding and support of our Speaker , Senator Molgat , the only public hearings on Meech Lake held outside of Ottawa were in the Yukon and Northwest Territories . 
since my appointment , all honourable senators have heard my pleas and have made special efforts to take Senate committees to the territories . 
honourable senators , I want to make a point here : 
when I say " all honourable senators , " I mean both sides of this chamber . 
the Yukon aboriginal people , who were assisted by the Senate , recalled to me their fond memories of the fine treatment they always received from senators , particularly during the passage of self - government and land claims legislation . 
i fought hard for Yukoners on Bill C - 68 , the gun control legislation . 
my office was able to assist Mr. Doug Phillips , then Minister of Justice in the Yukon , by arranging meetings for him when he was here fighting Bill C - 68 . 
we were also able to supply committee hearing reports and many pages of material to the people of the Yukon and Northern B.C. We did not win the battle , but Yukoners were heard , and I believe we were able to make a bad piece of legislation better with our comments and suggestions . 
i sat on the first Senate Energy Committee , created by Senator Bud Olson to help the Senate deal with the energy policy challenges of the last two decades . 
i was involved in the Foothills pipeline negotiations , looking after the interests of the Yukon and its residents . 
i was fortunate to have an opportunity to serve the Yukon as its first senator . 
i moved to Yukon in 1949 and have lived and worked there for decades . 
i served as Whitehorse councillor and mayor for eight years . 
i raised my children there , and most of family and friends are there now . 
i took that knowledge of the people , the history and the unique way of life of the Yukon and tried to apply it to the deliberations that I was making in Ottawa . 
i tried to influence decisions in Ottawa that would affect the Yukon . 
travelling back and forth and dealing with time - zone changes has not always been easy , but I loved the opportunity to meet so many people and deal with such a variety of issues . 
health problems have made my attendance more difficult in recent years , but as senators are aware , much of our work occurs outside the chamber . 
this whole debate was sparked by the issue of Senator Thompson ' s attendance . 
i deplore his attendance record and the shame it has brought on this institution and its members . 
we all know that attendance requires appearing in this place and being recorded as being present , even if only for a moment . 
we all know that the work of a senator is far more substantial and demanding than that . 
i have seen senators at work . 
i can put in a full day working on behalf of Yukoners without showing up in Ottawa . 
i have telephones , fax machines and other modern conveniences to help me represent the Yukon . 
i know that my colleagues work hard , and we do our work well . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt the Honourable Senator Lucier , but the 15 - minute time period has expired . 
is leave granted for the Honourable Senator Lucier to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
senator Lucier : 
we do not chase the limelight . 
we are not always noticed , but we are useful and effective . 
we are a chamber of sober second thought . 
we do improve the legislation sent to us from the other place . 
we are able to provide another method of representing the people in our regions . 
we produce good studies and add to the quality of government programs and services . 
senator Thompson deserved to be criticized . 
i am glad that he did the right thing and resigned . 
however , we do not all deserve to be tarred with the same brush . 
i am proud of my 27 years of accomplishment working on behalf of Yukoners in Ottawa and in the Yukon . 
i am proud to be a senator in this assembly with such distinguished colleagues . 
in conclusion , a reformed , effective , elected , equal - by - region Senate is attainable . 
some take pride in finding a problem for every solution . 
my view is and always has been that if Canadians want a reformed Senate , they should make their views known loudly and clearly , particularly to the ten premiers . 
in that way , true Senate reform will become a reality . 
i wish to state clearly that if there is an elected Senate position available in the Yukon , I will step aside immediately and be there to congratulate our first elected senator . 
on motion of Senator Di Nino , debate adjourned . 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Gauthier calling the attention of the Senate to the Journ é e internationale de la francophonie , on Friday , March 20 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Gigant è s ) 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , it is an honour to speak on this important issue raised by our colleague Senator Gauthier . 
canada is very fortunate to be a centre of la Francophonie because of the French culture and civilization , which are priceless . 
through communication , civilizations have always been able to draw from one another and to find beautiful threads for their tapestries . 
that is indeed how trading in the eastern Mediterranean came to be dominated by the Greek currency ; the Greeks were great traders who could speak with people from other countries because they had invented vowels . 
we are enriched by it and by the francophones who live in this country . 
senator Gauthier has done extensive work in this area and we owe him a debt of gratitude . 
he has been instrumental in preserving the French fact , a feature Canada would not want to do without . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
on motion of Senator Murray , debate adjourned . 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee - Motion Modified - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kelly , seconded by the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme , P . C . : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to hear evidence on and consider matters relating to the security intelligence operations of the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the extent to which the recommendations of the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and the Public Safety ( June 1987 ) and the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and the Public Safety ( June 1989 ) have been addressed thus far by the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the adequacy of the review or oversight of the Government of Canada ' s security and intelligence apparatus , including each of the organizations in departments of government that conduct security and intelligence operations or that have a security and intelligence mandate ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to intra - governmental and inter - governmental co - ordination relating to the Government of Canada ' s security intelligence mandate and operations ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the overall mandate and current threat assessment capability of the Government of Canada ' s security intelligence apparatus and of the individual organizations therein ; 
that seven Senators , to be designated at a later date , act as members of the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to report from time to time , to send for persons , papers and records , and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; and 
that the Committee present its final report no later than April 15 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I ask leave of the Senate , pursuant to rule 30 , for the opportunity to modify the motion presently before us . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Kelly : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
the modifications are relatively minor . 
they emerged as a result of conversations I have had with senior officials in the Privy Council Office , the ministry of the Solicitor General , and with the Solicitor General . 
i move that the motion be amended to read as follows : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to hear evidence on and consider matters relating to the threat posed to Canada by terrorism and counter - terrorism activities of the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the current international threat environment , with particular reference to terrorism as it relates to Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the extent to which the recommendations of the report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety ( June 1987 ) and the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety ( June 1989 ) have been addressed by the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the threat assessment capability of the Government of Canada relative to the threats of terrorism ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the leadership role , preparedness and review of those departments and agencies of the Government of Canada with counter - terrorism responsibilities ; 
that the Committee examine and assess the level of international cooperation between Canada and its allies with respect to the evolving nature of the terrorist threat ; 
that seven senators , to be designated at a later date , act as members of the committee ; 
that the committee have power to report from time to time , to send for persons , papers and records , and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; and 
that the Committee present its final report no later than September 29 , 1998 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the original motion was moved by the Honourable Senator Kelly and seconded by the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme . 
is it agreed that the revision is now before us and properly moved ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Kelly : 
honourable senators , I should like to wait until Thursday to speak on this motion in order to give senators a chance to compare the two motions to see whether they have any objections or concerns . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that the matter will stand in the name of the Honourable Senator Kelly ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Kelly , debate adjourned . 
income Tax Act 
motion Proposing an Amendment - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Meighen , seconded by the Honourable Senator Kirby : 
that the Senate urges the Government , in the February 1998 Budget , to propose an amendment to the Income Tax Act that would increase to 30 per cent , by increments of 2 per cent per year over a five - year period , the foreign property component of deferred income plans ( pension plans , registered retirement savings plans and registered pension plans ) , as was done in the period between 1990 to 1995 when the foreign property limit of deferred income plans was increased from 10 per cent to 20 per cent , because : 
( a ) Canadians should be permitted to take advantage of potentially better investment returns in other markets , thereby increasing the value of their financial assets held for retirement , reducing the amount of income supplement that Canadians may need from government sources , and increasing government tax revenues from retirement income ; 
( b ) Canadians should have more flexibility when investing their retirement savings , while reducing the risk of those investments through diversification ; 
( c ) greater access to the world equity market would allow Canadians to participate in both higher growth economies and industry sectors ; 
( d ) the current 20 per cent limit has become artificial since both individuals with significant resources and pension plans with significant resources can by - pass the current limit through the use of , for example , strategic investment decisions and derivative products ; and 
( e ) problems of liquidity for pension fund managers , who now find they must take substantial positions in a single company to meet the 80 per cent Canadian holdings requirement , would be reduced . - ( 
honourable Senator Gigant è s ) . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , there were some terms in what Senator Oliver said which gave me pause . 
he used the words " global economy " and said that the fact that we are moving towards a global economy was some sort of justification for what he was supporting - that is , more investment by Canada abroad through RRSPs or whatever . 
the other phrase which disturbed me was the one in which he seemed to be suggesting that such decisions had better be left to sophisticated investors , those knowledgeable in such matters . 
well , I presume it was such sophisticated investors who poured Canadian money into Latin America not so very long ago . 
senator Di Nino : 
Asia . 
senator Gigant è s : 
it was Latin America to start with . 
they lost their shirts - excuse me , they lost our shirts . 
having left Latin America crumbling under a burden of debt at high interest rates , they then proceeded to do the same thing with Africa . 
these are the sophisticated , knowledgeable investors to whom we should entrust such operations . 
what is the state of Africa ? 
Africa is crumbling under a burden of foreign debts . 
many of our banks have problems with these debts . 
the IMF has had to step in and make the people of Africa poorer , hungrier and more miserable than they were . 
having completed that splendid achievement , they moved to Asia . 
what did they do in Asia ? 
they invested our money in strengthening and multiplying facilities for manufacturing exports . 
given that our money was going there , we did not invest enough in making jobs here . 
our rate of growth was slower than predicted because those Asian manufacturers could not export according to the targets they had set for themselves , and the consequence was the Asian flu . 
are these sophisticated and knowledgeable investors evil ? 
no , but they are dealing with something that we do not understand . 
they are dealing with a change that parallels in its intensity and unforeseen consequences the Industrial Revolution , the mechanization of agriculture , the invention of the automobile , the coming of atomic power , and now the sophisticated techniques of communication which have turned the world , indeed , into one money market and one stock market that no one understands but so many can manipulate . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
reports on Social and Economic Development 
inquiry - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Kinsella calling the attention of the Senate to reports on social and economic development . - ( 
honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise today to speak because I agree with Senator Kinsella . 
it is not often that he and I agree , although he and I have come up with some interesting vocabulary about that as a result of our trip to the United Kingdom . 
you may have noticed the other day his use of the term " dark art , " and he is now using words such as " the usual channels , " both of which refer to that trip . 
however , I will speak more about that on another occasion . 
in his speech of February 10 , Senator Kinsella indicated - and this is the comment with which I am in full agreement - that we must spend much more time and attention on the reports that Canada submits to the United Nations . 
as you are aware , Canada has been committed to the promotion of human rights since the establishment of the UN . 
the role of the UN conventions is to recognize and build upon rights , fundamentally using moral suasion , education and public opinion . 
currently , Canada is party to the six principal UN human rights conventions , which are the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , ratified by Canada in 1970 ; the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , ratified in 1976 ; the Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , ratified in 1976 ; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women , ratified in 1981 ; the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel , Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment , ratified in 1987 ; and the Convention on the Rights of the Child , ratified by Canada in May of 1990 . 
upon Canada ' s ratification of each convention , it agreed to implement the convention , to monitor that implementation and to report periodically to the UN . 
the reports submitted to the UN outline the measures taken by the Canadian government , provinces and territories to help promote social rights . 
it is the federal government ' s responsibility to present the reports . 
however , each provincial or territorial government also has the right to prepare its own report on its human rights activities . 
the reports parallel a " report card " for Canada , or as Senator Kinsella termed it , a " social audit . " 
there are several reasons these reports should be given more attention . 
as Senator Kinsella suggested , awareness can stimulate debate in the House of Commons and Senate and increase Canadian public awareness of the workings of its federal , provincial and territorial governments . 
honourable senators , it is to this latter issue that I will speak . 
take , for example , the International Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
the 1995 concluding observations of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child on Canada ' s 1989 report recommended that educational campaigns be launched with a view to changing attitudes in society on the use of physical punishment in the family and fostering the acceptance of legal prohibition . 
the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that all forms of corporal punishment and ill - treatment of children in the home and elsewhere be prohibited , and it requested that Canada reconsider section 43 in light of this recommendation . 
since 1989 , when Canada became a signatory to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , it has come under international criticism - and I think justly - for failing to repeal section 43 of the code , which is in conflict with section 19 of the United Nations convention . 
other countries , which are signatories to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , such as Sweden , Finland , Denmark , Norway , Austria and Cyprus , have banned the physical punishment of children . 
i believe it is obligatory for the Canadian government to make its public aware that they have not lived up to this obligation . 
a second reason I suggest that the Canadian public be made aware of these reports , honourable senators , is that they can aid in public consciousness of the nation ' s meritorious record of economic and social development . 
the reports Canada submits detailing their actions are in many ways commendable . 
informing Canadians of their federal , provincial and territorial governments ' accomplishments has the potential to facilitate public pride and confidence . 
an illustration of Canada ' s commendable record is the measures the Government of Canada has taken on constitutional , legislative , administrative and other levels to implement the rights set forth in the Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
for example , the report outlines that several federal departments collaborated in the production and launching of the National Film Board ' s Rights from the Heart , and animated film series for children about their rights . 
a further illustration is the federal government ' s preventive action for children at risk of poverty , abuse and neglect . 
they inform that public consultation is involved in the functioning of the Canadian government . 
the silencing of Joe Public ' s voice , as we know , is always a concern . 
the reports have the potential to decrease the feeling of alienation , or of not being listened to , on the part of the public . 
for example , the Third Report on the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights speaks of the 1996 appointment of a Federal Task Force on Disability Issues , and details its consultation with the disabled community in recommending policy . 
quite honestly , I feel that since the community is both consulted and reflected in the reports , it is only proper that the community be made aware of them . 
my fourth suggestion for active introduction of the UN reports to the public is that they address , and potentially demystify , issues that Canadians have collectively verbalized opposition against , such as the new Employment Insurance Program . 
the reports provide a forum for the government in which to contextualize its decisions . 
as we know , the media , which is the staple of public opinion formation , often presents information out of its context , or not in a complete way . 
using EI as an example , the report makes it clear to the reader that the program is a response to the approaches taken by Canada to the challenges of poverty and hunger . 
it explains that the new hours - based system is designed to assist unemployed Canadians secure employment , and protect low - income claimants , particularly those with children , through an innovative Family Income Supplement . 
how many Canadians are aware that this is one of the reasons that modifications were made to the old UI system ? 
indeed , Canadians will not agree with everything in the report , but that , too , is important . 
facts should be made public because , as we know , anything that is presented as fault - free usually is not . 
all of Canada ' s reports to the United Nations are published in both official languages , distributed domestically , and are in the catalogue of Canadian government publications available to the public . 
this last report to which Senator Kinsella referred , Canada ' s Third Report on the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , is no exception , and the Canadian public , for reasons mentioned , should be made aware of it . 
proactive initiatives need to be taken to inform Canada of its government ' s stately social audit . 
honourable senators , I encourage you to have a look through this most recent report , if you have not already done so . 
i am sure you will agree with many of its findings . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this inquiry will be considered debated . 
energy 
Sable Island Gas Projects - Motion to Authorize Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources Committee to Examine and Review the Process - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Simard , seconded by the Honourable Senator Kinsella : 
that the Senate of Canada urge the Governor in Council not to give final approval to the project submitted by the consortium that proposed the Maritime and Northeast Pipeline Project until the Government of Canada has fulfilled its obligation to hold full and fair hearings on the proposals submitted by all interested parties , including the TransMaritime Pipeline Proposal , considering the following : 
( a ) the natural resources of Canada are the property of all Canadians ; 
( b ) the needs and interests of Canadians should be considered first and foremost in the exploitation , development and use of Canada ' s natural resources ; 
( c ) the recommended Maritime and Northeast Pipeline proposal overwhelmingly favours American interests over the interests of Canadians by channelling 83 % of the natural gas extracted from the Sable Offshore Energy Project to the United States , while a mere 17 % will be allocated to only two Canadian provinces , Nova Scotia and southern New Brunswick ; 
( d ) the TransMaritime pipeline proposal places the interests of Canadians first by allocating 64 % of the Sable Offshore natural gas to four Canadian provinces , including 34 % to Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , as opposed to a total volume of only 36 % to the United States ; 
( e ) the TransMaritime proposal allows the provinces of Ontario and Quebec to benefit from any natural gas from the Sable Offshore Energy Project ; 
( f ) the TransMaritime Pipeline proposal offers support for Canadian industry and security of energy supplies for central Canada , and offers more Canadians a greater supply of natural gas at a lower cost ; 
( g ) the TransMaritime Pipeline proposal generates employment opportunities and provides long - term benefits to disadvantaged northern New Brunswick ; 
( h ) the TransMaritime Pipeline proposal will unite Canada , since it sends a positive message of inclusion , security , opportunity , and sharing within the Confederation , to Canadians in four provinces , including Acadians , Quebecers and francophone Ontarians ; 
( i ) the refusal of the Sable Offshore Energy Project Joint Review Panel and the National Energy Board to hear the proposal submitted by TransMaritime Pipeline may seriously prejudice the rights of Canadians in the development and use of their energy resources and may undermine Canada ' s sovereignty over these resources ; 
( j ) a significant amount of time will not be saved in the development of one pipeline instead of the other ; and 
( k ) deciding the matter without considering all available options may be more damaging than any relatively minor delay that could result from a thorough and fair review ; 
that the matter of the process undertaken by the Sable Offshore Energy Project Joint Review Panel and the National Energy Board , in recommending that the Maritime and Northeast Pipeline project be allowed to proceed , be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources and that the Committee be authorized to examine and report upon the matter ; and 
that the Committee present its final report to the Senate no later than February 28 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , may I ask a question of Senator Carstairs ? 
it has been three months and a week since Senator Carstairs adjourned the debate on this motion . 
can you tell us , Senator Carstairs , whether or not you intend to address this issue ? 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
no , honourable senators , it is not my intention to participate in the debate , but anyone else who wishes to do so is more than welcome . 
order Stands . 
human Rights in Asia 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino rose pursuant to notice of December 10 , 1997 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the matter of human rights in Asia with particular emphasis on China and Indonesia and the Government of Canada ' s policy with respect to this matter . 
during the course of my different interventions , I have attempted not only to inform but to provoke a greater understanding of the issues surrounding this question . 
as many of you are aware , the question of Chinese repression in Tibet is one close to my heart . 
i have referred to it as Tibet ' s nightmare , a nightmare of invasion , repression , and slow , inexorable cultural genocide . 
that was a few years ago . 
today , the situation is no better . 
in fact it is worse , as China pursues its aggressive policy of integrating Tibet economically and politically through massive population transfers . 
unfortunately , Tibet is not alone . 
in many areas of Asia , persecution and abuses of human rights remain all too common . 
despite the gloomy situations in many parts of Asia , there is hope . 
this hope is being borne by the winds of democracy , of evolution , and of enlightenment that have , in the last few years , brought the fall of the Soviet Bloc in Europe and the dismantling of apartheid in South Africa . 
there is hope that the same winds will sweep over Asia and bring change to places like China , Tibet and Indonesia . 
however , hope is not enough to bring about change . 
there must be action , backed by consensus . 
here we run into difficulty . 
while there appears to be a general consensus that the situation in parts of Asia is bad , there has been little action to bring about change . 
this is particularly so in the case of Canada . 
in 1994 , I said Canada had come to a fork in the road as far as its promotion of human rights was concerned . 
we were in danger of straying from the path we had followed for so long . 
today , sadly , this has come to pass . 
respect for human rights , standing up for the less fortunate , and the promotion of democracy and the rule of law have been replaced by new values like greed , pragmatism and realpolitik . 
the fault for this unfortunate waywardness , for Canada having gone astray , lies squarely with the present government and , more particularly , with the Prime Minister . 
until the present government came to office in Canada , we were known worldwide for our stance on human rights . 
the promotion of human rights was an integral part of our foreign policy . 
it set us apart from other nations . 
we promoted human rights not by going to war or with flowery turns of phrase , but through practical means like bilateral aid and , occasionally , sanctions in countries such as Chile , Uganda , the former Soviet Union , South Africa , China and Indonesia . 
following the 1993 election , this policy began to change . 
prime Minister Chr é tien and his foreign ministers made trade the pivot around which this country ' s foreign policy was henceforth to revolve . 
human rights were relegated to the footnotes . 
suddenly Canada was selling millions of dollars worth of military goods to countries such as Indonesia , and subverting Canadian environmental law in order to sell nuclear reactors to China . 
naturally , and with good reason , the government was criticized for these actions . 
in order to try to deflect some of the heat , it took a series of stands on human rights abuses in countries such as Burma , Haiti and Nigeria . 
however , the public was not appeased . 
if the government was ready to take firm action with regard to human rights abuses in these countries , why not do the same in places such as China and Indonesia ? 
why was it that in the case of these countries , the Liberal ' s previous firm resolve suddenly melted into a meandering muddle of shifting and shifty jabberwocky . 
why , indeed ? 
the answer was not long in coming . 
canada , he said , was far too small and unimportant a nation . 
it would be futile , indeed silly , to expect that our concerns about human rights would be taken into consideration by countries such as China . 
when I heard this startling admission by the Prime Minister , for a moment I was at a loss for words . 
surely , he is aware that Canadians have rights and freedoms and liberties only dreamed of in other parts of the world . 
Mr. Chr é tien ' s role is to espouse these rights and freedoms and to promote them , it is not his role to shrug his shoulders and to mutter that there is nothing he can do . 
what kind of signal does this send to millions of people who look to Canada as a beacon of enlightenment and hope ? 
what signal does it send to NGOs working diligently to improve conditions and stop abuses in many parts of the world and that also look to Canada for inspiration and leadership ? 
what message does it convey to the different governments guilty of human rights abuses ? 
the present government ' s attitude underscores a fundamental point that few appear to have seized upon , namely , that the Liberals are simply going through the motions with regard to human rights . 
they are paying lip service to traditional values that we once promoted proudly . 
yes , I know the government can point to the Red Book and the various statements by the Prime Minister to the effect that his is a caring government and one committed to bettering the human rights situations around the globe , but I - and many others - can point , too . 
we can point to the fact that when in opposition , the Liberals were often at the barricades calling for action over Indonesia , which they claimed had one of the worst human rights records in Asia . 
we can also point to their 1993 promise to lead the international community in what they called the revitalization of the concept of human rights ; or their promise to publish an annual human rights report on all countries receiving aid from Canada . 
i need not remind honourable senators that neither of these promises have been kept . 
that should not surprise anyone . 
this government and kept promises are hardly synonymous . 
the present government ' s foreign policy can be summarized in one word : profit . 
this is the one common denominator that links together the bizarre collection of contradictory pronouncements and actions that Canada has presented to the world since 1983 . 
profit and profitability are the new Canadian values , the altar upon which Canada ' s history of moral leadership on the issue of human rights has been sacrificed . 
this is not to say that the Prime Minister has been silent . 
his press office claims that the Prime Minister discusses human rights abuses constantly . 
it is too bad he never does so publicly so that we can judge for ourselves . 
instead , we were told , once again , that he had " raised the issue " during meetings . 
if we criticize people , we isolate them . 
there is no middle ground . 
the weaknesses of this argument are easily seen . 
first and foremost , by stating that we will no longer speak out , we are giving up that option . 
we are giving credence to the idea that it is not for us to comment on other countries ' internal affairs , no matter what the issue . 
second , it presupposes that all criticism is necessarily blunt and confrontational , which obviously is not the case . 
third , it precludes a whole range of options that Canada can use to encourage change and stop human rights abuses . 
Mr. Chr é tien ' s claims to the contrary , Canada is not a country of no consequence . 
we are not impotent . 
we are not eunuchs . 
we are among the world ' s most advanced economies . 
we are a major player in the Commonwealth , la Francophonie and , increasingly , the OAS . 
we belong to the World Bank , the IMF and the WTO . 
we have access to a myriad of institutions of power and influence - institutions which play a role in Asian countries . 
a few years ago , my colleague Senator Ghitter outlined a few of them . 
they bear repeating today . 
senator Ghitter suggested we begin by exposing and criticizing nations whose human rights records are unacceptable . 
we could also refuse to buy goods manufactured under slave labour conditions and call on our allies to follow suit . 
we could also promote and participate in the building and implementation of non - corrupt judiciaries . 
there are , of course , many other possibilities , but the point I wish to make is that we must do something . 
we must move beyond the rhetoric and dialogue . 
it is too simplistic to say that trade will bring economic growth which will some day , hopefully , engender political reform . 
we must get back to the situation where our foreign policy has some depth and some imagination . 
we need a foreign policy that melds a certain degree of idealism with concrete , practical proposals for change and improvement in areas such as human rights . 
more important , we need a foreign policy that reflects the fundamental values of our society as a whole , not simply those of the business community . 
the present government ' s foreign policy is based on customers . 
this must be changed . 
people must be brought back into the equation . 
canada must be a beacon of hope for those suffering from abuse by the state . 
it must keep a light in the window for those nations which have fallen by the wayside and have begun to abuse their citizens . 
as a country , we have a commitment to the development of human rights , democracy and the rule of law . 
we cannot turn our backs on this heritage . 
for millions of people around the word , we are a model of peace , tolerance and respect for diversity . 
we must not abandon this for profit . 
my hope - and I am not alone - is that they do . 
instead of sitting on its hands , Canada should be sending a message - and forcefully so - that people have a right to live free , free from intimidation , free to enjoy their customs , cultures and religions without constraint , free from fear of reprisal . 
in the case of Tibet , we must continue to speak out , to condemn the abuses grown common in that country and to push for change that will allow a non - violent people to live their own lives as they see fit in their own particular corner of the world . 
the key is international pressure . 
we must act with others in a concerted and coordinated fashion . 
simply amassing information about what has been happening in Asia with regard to human rights is not enough . 
we must act . 
this does not mean isolating countries . 
on the contrary , we should encourage contact , for it is in isolation , away from the spotlight of world opinion and opprobrium , that abuses are allowed to continue unchecked . 
by keeping channels of communication open , by offering constructive criticism and by linking trade and human rights , we provide hope for the people in Asia suffering from abuses that peace will come again to their countries . 
to trade with countries guilty of such practices without any strings attached , without any attempt to make things better , is to become party to the crimes and oppression there committed . 
the Prime Minister vaunts the success and dollar value of his many trade trips abroad , but at what cost and lost opportunity to improvements in human rights in those countries ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i regret to interrupt the honourable senator , but your 15 - minute speaking period has expired . 
are you requesting leave to continue ? 
senator Di Nino : 
i request leave , yes . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Di Nino : 
his government is wilfully and systematically ignoring and neglecting Canada ' s international commitments to the protection and promotion of human rights . 
this does not appear to bother him a wit ; however , it should . 
canada ' s reputation as a defender of human rights is a boon to our trade prospects in many parts of the world . 
moreover , Canada ' s previous insistence on linking human rights and foreign aid is a valuable foreign policy tool . 
today , the G - 7 rules the roost . 
this will not always be the case . 
in Asia and Africa , economies are emerging that alone or in combination will , in years to come , rise to challenge the G - 7 ' s hegemony . 
as new alliances form in reaction to these developments , Canada will be well placed to profit from its long commitment to human rights and its interest in the welfare of the people in emerging nations . 
the present government , by ignoring Canada ' s long tradition in this area , is being tragically short - sighted . 
this government is thinking tactically , when it should be thinking strategically . 
honourable senators , the international community , of which Canada is a leading member , has an obligation to support , morally and politically , democracy , human rights and the rule of law in countries where these are absent or where they are under attack . 
it is our duty to support these , the foundation stones of free , progressive and stable societies . 
the present government , to its shame , has abandoned this obligation . 
this government ' s backsliding on the issue of human rights has been underlined by a series of events since the beginning of the new year . 
in late January , the minister for international cooperation announced with great pomp that Canada , through CIDA , was supporting a pilot project to promote human rights in Thailand , the Philippines , Malaysia and Indonesia . 
somehow China was not included in this list . 
in February , the Prime Minister refused to take a few minutes of his time to meet with Wei Jingsheng when he was here in Ottawa , a Nobel Prize nominee and father of the democracy movement in China . 
in early March , the foreign minister referred to those qualities that characterize Canada which are reflected in our foreign policy . 
he failed to mention human rights . 
a little less than two weeks ago , in Washington , the American House International Relations Committee and Senate Foreign Relations Committee both approved motions calling on the Clinton administration to introduce a resolution condemning China ' s human rights abuses at the upcoming meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Commission in China . 
the next day , the United States Senate as a whole approved a similar motion . 
in Canada , nary a word was heard from the government . 
officials from foreign affairs later sent out a short press release , calling China ' s announcement at the meeting that it would sign the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights a welcome move . 
honourable senators , it would be most welcome for this government to put human rights back into its foreign policy . 
just because we wish to trade with a country it does not mean that we must put our principles in our back pocket , that we must forget our commitments or that we must ignore abuses that would not be tolerated in Canada . 
we used to be known as a country that stood for something . 
we were a bit stuffy , perhaps , however we made it clear that there was a right and acceptable way . 
i am not sure this is true today . 
in a few short years , the present government has squandered our hard - won reputation . 
commitment has been replaced by dithering and policy by platitudes . 
we have forsaken the thousands if not millions who have looked upon us and counted on us for leadership in the area of human rights . 
we can only hope that cabinet will see the error of its ways and will convince the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs to put human rights back in the forefront of Canadian foreign policy . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I do not think anyone can quarrel with Senator DiNino ' s objectives on human rights and democracy . 
however , some of his facts bother me . 
today in The New York Times the Dalai Lama indicated that he was in full support of the new leadership in China and he welcomed changes . 
senator Di Nino seems to indicate that there appears to be almost no change on that front . 
can the honourable senator explain the difference between his position stated in the house today and the Dalai Lama ' s own position as stated in The New York Times ? 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I have not read what the Dalai Lama said in that magazine . 
however , on three occasions I have had private audiences with him . 
i know his concerns from a face - to - face meeting with him . 
in the past number of years , this man of peace has expressed sincere frustration to the world over his thwarted attempts at finding common ground with the Chinese leadership . 
i stress that none of the Dalai Lama ' s criticism has ever been directed at the Chinese people but rather at the Chinese leadership . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I do not want to take the words out of context , but according to The New York Times article , the Dalai Lama was applauding the new leadership and was looking forward to positive change . 
that was today . 
senator Di Nino : 
i have not read that article , but as late as four or five months ago when we were at a meeting on the issue , the position of the Tibetan government in exile , including the Dalai Lama , was one of tremendous frustration in trying to get to the table with the leaders of China to commence some reasonable dialogue to solve the problems . 
i cannot comment on the article . 
i have not seen it . 
i do not know if it is correct . 
i can tell honourable senators , from personal experience and discussions with the Dalai Lama and his chief ministers , that the article may be referring to a sincere hope for change . 
i certainly hope so . 
senator Grafstein : 
perhaps we can go back and read the article . 
the Senator might be able to then provide clarification . 
senator Di Nino also spoke of a lack of democracy in China , and many of us who have been observers of Chinese politics agree with that statement in general terms . 
however , by the same token , the senator made no reference to the fact of the growing democratization from the villages , the grass roots , in China . 
would the honourable senator enlighten the Senate about that situation ? 
no reference was made to that at all . 
is this not happening ? 
as the honourable senator will know , in thousands of villages throughout China , officials are now being elected , with debate and exchange of viewpoints . 
that has been recently documented . 
senator Di Nino : 
i am happy to engage in a lengthy debate on this issue , but let me tell what I know . 
we are speaking in this debate about China only as it applies to Indonesia . 
the issue of dialogue between the oppressor and the oppressed is an issue which has been raised in many ways , including by a motion in this chamber . 
many have requested that the leadership in China engage , without pre - condition , in discussion with the Dalai Lama to attempt to resolve this impasse . 
there are several reports from the United Nations , AsiaWatch and other respected organizations on abuses in China , and one must ask : 
who do I believe ? 
in my opinion , the Chinese leadership has made absolutely no attempt in this regard . 
on the contrary , they have stymied any opportunity for dialogue with His Holiness in attempting solve this problem . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I listened to the objectives of Senator Di Nino ' s speech , but am still bewildered by the absence of facts on positive changes in China . 
another example is the rule of law . 
in terms of increasing trade , the rule of law that was absent under the older regimes in China now appears to be blossoming at the grass - roots level . 
our common law started in the same way , by way of the commercial rule of law . 
we see the same thing happening in China . 
senator Di Nino made no reference to that . 
i do not disagree with the senator ' s making some general points , but I would hope that in this chamber we would have a better fact base upon which to engage in a dialogue that might be positive with regard to our policy , and perhaps enlighten the public . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I am not making general points ; I am making specific points . 
these are not my comments but the comments of organizations such as the United Nations . 
specifically , in the past two weeks both Congress and the Senate of the United States of America have passed a resolution condemning China for its human rights abuses . 
i believe that you are correct in saying that there is a movement toward change . 
i welcome and applaud that , but I think we are a long way from being able to suggest that China is a democratic country . 
senator Grafstein : 
canada needs no moral lessons whatsoever from the Senate or the Congress of the United States with respect to our relationship with China . 
we were the first in the world to open the China door . 
the United States followed us . 
they were not the leaders . 
the way we are proceeding demonstrates sensitivity and leadership of a more complex nature , but that is for another day . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I wish to ask a question of Senator Di Nino . 
i was surprised by a remark he made at the beginning of his speech . 
he said that the Canadian government seems to be acting only for profit . 
considering his career and that of some of his colleagues , and considering how many Canadian businessmen who support his party have been trading with Indonesia and China , that remark surprised me . 
will he advise businessmen who support his party to have nothing to do with China ? 
senator Di Nino : 
the simple answer is yes , and I have . 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , debate adjourned . 
civil Code of Quebec 
difficulties and Problems Arising from Section 35 - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Jacques H é bert rose pursuant to notice of Tuesday , March 17 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the difficulties and problems raised by section 35 of the new Civil Code of Quebec . 
honourable senators , on Thursday , February 26 , 1998 , during the period set aside for senators ' statements , I wanted to comment on the new section 35 of the Quebec Civil Code . 
i explained that this section had been redrafted and interpreted absurdly . 
unfortunately , I did not have enough time to express my full opinion , as I could not continue past the three minutes allocated for statements by senators . 
section 35 of the Civil Code states clearly that everyone has a right to respect for his reputation . 
it also says that no one may invade the privacy of another without the consent of the individual or his heirs unless authorized by law . 
this relatively new provision was passed as part of the revision of the Civil Code in January 1994 . Section 35 is based on certain provisions of the Quebec Charter of Rights and Freedoms , which recognizes the basic right to privacy . 
i quote section 35 : 
every person has a right to the respect of his reputation and privacy . 
no one may invade the privacy of a person without the consent of the person or his heirs unless authorized by law . 
clearly , few people would question the need to protect one ' s privacy to a certain point . 
however , without the permission of all the heirs of a deceased individual , it appears impossible under section 35 to publish a biography even of historical figures . 
the case involves well - known historian and writer Pierre Turgeon , who was twice the recipient of the Governor General award , and Quincailleries R é no - D é p ô t , a chain of hardware stores , and its president , Pierre Michaud . 
i will not get into the details of this civil case . 
god forbid . 
however , to illustrate what I am talking about , I will give an outline of the dispute , which has been making headlines for over a year . 
Pierre Michaud is trying to prevent , through a permanent injunction , Mr. Turgeon from publishing a book that he wrote about his great - uncle , Paul - Herv é Desrosiers , who died in 1969 . 
Pierre Michaud also claims that , in his capacity as his great - uncle ' s universal legatee , he has ownership of the facts surrounding the life of that man , and that he can dispose of them as he pleases . 
several of my colleagues have heard about Paul - Herv é Desrosiers , or P . H . to his friends . 
some senators even knew him personally . 
here is a brief description for those who know nothing about this colourful character . 
p . H . Desrosiers , who came from a very modest background , was born in 1898 , in a small Quebec town . 
he was an ordinary tradesman who went on to become one of the most powerful business leaders of the Duplessis years . 
p . H . mingled with the political elite and prospered . 
his companies experienced such growth that , in his biography of Duplessis , Conrad Black referred to P . H . as a very colourful entrepreneur who had benefited from government contracts awarded under the Duplessis government . 
within a few decades , Val - Royal , which was founded in 1933 , became one of Quebec ' s main employers , providing building materials in every corner of the province . 
in order to consolidate his control , P . H . sat on the boards of directors of major mining and manufacturing companies . 
he was also a contributor to the party led by Maurice Duplessis and he had a great deal of influence on several premiers . 
when he died , Paul - Herv é Desrosiers , who did not have children , left Val - Royal to his great - nephews , Pierre and Claude Michaud , who decided to rename it R é no - D é p ô t . 
along with the Michaud brothers , this hardware chain , which has annual sales of half a billion dollars , is seeking a publication ban on the book written by Pierre Turgeon . 
on February 3 , 1998 , in reaction to section 35 , the Association des historiens made the following statement in La Presse : 
freedom of expression is very much at stake . 
what is to be remembered ? 
a number of other organizations have expressed similar concerns , including the Union des é crivains du Qu é bec , the F é d é ration professionnelle des journalistes du Qu é bec , the Civil Liberties Union , the Montreal Historical Society , the Institut d ' histoire de l ' Am é rique fran ç aise , SARDEC or Soci é t é des auteurs , recherchistes , documentalistes et compositeurs , the Union des artistes , the Association des r é alisateurs de films et de t é l é vision , the Association des producteurs de films , and the Association nationale des é diteurs de livres . 
in an unprecedented event , historians , writers , journalists and artists have joined forces with the culture industry in calling for the abolition of a clause of the Civil Code which endangers their freedom and the very possibility of pursuing a career as creators or researchers . 
this outcry comes not only from the cultural community but also from the general public , as shown by the F é d é ration des travailleurs du Qu é bec ' s support of Pierre Turgeon , through its president , Cl é ment Godbout , who states categorically : 
all the evidence here points to a true act of censorship . 
i would point out , in passing , that all the unionized workers of R é no - D é p ô t are also represented by the FTQ , and they feel they have as much right as their bosses to know the real history of the business . 
in an editorial in Le Devoir on Saturday , March 14 , Gilles Lesage stated as follows : 
these disquieting restrictions affect researchers and historians , genealogists and archivists , journalists , and finally all of us as citizens . 
another remarkable thing about this case is that it has succeeded in uniting anglophones and francophones , Quebecers and Ontarians . 
Pierre Turgeon has received the support of the Writers Union of Canada and the Canadian Historical Association , whose president , Judith Fingard , wrote him as follows : 
historians are naturally concerned that provincial and federal laws may be used to block access to our sources of information . 
moreover , La Presse , Le Devoir and the Gazette have been unanimous in calling for a total reform of the Civil Code on all privacy issues . 
in a Maclean ' s article on the Pierre Turgeon case which appeared on May 5 , it was reported that , while researching his biography of Lucien Bouchard , author Lawrence Martin received a warning letter from a Mr. Laprise , a lawyer representing Jocelyne C ô t é , the first Mrs. Bouchard . 
invoking section 35 and the following sections of the Civil Code , the lawyer insisted the biographer cease his research immediately . 
Mr. Martin , a Maclean ' s journalist , stated : 
how far can this thing go ? 
can you be charged with an offence for simply asking questions ? 
in terms of free speech it is very threatening and quite absurd . 
it would be very naive to think that the actions involved in such a serious attack on freedom of expression will be limited for much longer to the Canadian information media . 
all the legal experts consulted agree that there is no other democracy in the world that has adopted a legal provision such as article 35 , which bequeaths to heirs , and leaves up to their individual judgment , right of ownership over the very reputation of the dead , whether or not they were historic figures , for centuries to come , if not for eternity . 
but how did an article as unfair and ridiculous slip into the Civil Code unbeknownst to the learned jurists who drafted it ? 
this question becomes all the more relevant when we learn from the architect of the revised Civil Code , Paul - Andr é Cr é peault , that article 35 appeared nowhere in the reform he proposed in 1978 , that he does not know where the article came from , and that he finds devoid of meaning a clause that claims to bequeath to heirs extrapatrimonial property that can only belong to a living person , that is to say respect for privacy . 
how did article 35 slip into the heart of the new Civil Code , just before it was unanimously passed by the Quebec National Assembly in 1994 ? 
perhaps future historians will be able to tell us - if we give them permission to do their work ! 
must Quebec ' s historians emigrate to Ontario in order to recount the history of their ancestors or , more ridiculous still , must they leave this task to their colleagues in other provinces ? 
it is my belief that , if it is to have any meaning , our Constitution must give all Canadians the same rights . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
i want to ask Senator H é bert one or two questions . 
first of all , I had not focused on this matter but his argument is very compelling . 
has he looked at the application of the Charter in this matter ? 
has he looked at the question of whether the federal power of disallowance applies to this subject - matter ? 
senator H é bert : 
no , Senator Grafstein , I did not . 
i was counting on you or a jurist of your calibre to do that . 
senator Grafstein : 
that is not a responsive answer but I welcome the opportunity to do that . 
i will look into the question . 
on motion of Senator Prud ' homme , debate adjourned . 
the Senate 
vacant Ontario Seat - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lowell Murray rose pursuant to notice of March 18 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the vacancy in the Senate created by the retirement of the Honourable Richard Doyle of Ontario ; to the long - standing tradition of appointing a senior journalist from Ontario to the Senate ; and to some helpful suggestions for the Prime Minister in this regard . 
the great George Brown , founder of the Globe and father of Confederation , was a senator until he was assassinated by a disgruntled employee . 
i hasten to add that the disgruntled employee was an employee of the Globe , not of the Senate . 
god forbid . 
then as now , disgruntled employees of the Senate were non - violent protesters , expressing their disgruntlement by sitting on their hands in the fashion later made famous by Mahatma Gandhi . 
the British Raj was as stymied by this passive resistance as our own Internal Economy Committee is today , but I digress . 
in 1945 , Prime Minister Mackenzie King plucked his favourite reporter right out of the parliamentary press gallery and appointed him to the Senate . 
his name was Charles Bishop . 
he had been born in Nova Scotia and graduated from Acadia University . 
however , after 40 years in the gallery , he was able to sit in more or less good conscience as a senator from Ontario . 
he was not the last Nova Scotian to have done this . 
senator Bishop had worked for The Ottawa Citizen and for Southam newspapers . 
needless to say , he was a Liberal . 
awaiting him on his arrival in the Senate was Senator William Rupert Davies , who had been appointed by Prime Minister King in 1942 . 
senator Davies was President of the Kingston Whig Standard . 
needless to say , he too was a Liberal . 
he was the author of a book entitled Pilgrims of the Press , which may or may not have been an account of how he and others from the gallery made it to the Senate . 
when the Progressive Conservatives came to office in 1957 , the obvious appointment to the Senate from the world of journalism was Grattan O ' Leary , the much loved editor of the Ottawa Journal . 
he had to wait five years for his preferment because he had backed the wrong horse at the Tory leadership convention in 1956 . 
prime Minister Diefenbaker finally relented in 1962 . 
Grattan O ' Leary , then 74 years of age , came to the Senate and regaled Parliament with his wit , wisdom and eloquence for another 14 years until his death in 1976 at the age of 88 . 
in drawing your attention to the Senate vacancy caused by the retirement of the former editor - in - chief of The Globe and Mail , the Honourable Richard J . Doyle , I do not mean to suggest that there are no journalists or former journalists left in this chamber . 
to name a few , Senator Corbin had been a journalist , but he came to the Senate after 16 years in the House of Commons . 
senator Gigant è s and Senator Fairbairn had been journalists , but they came here after a period of political indoctrination in the Prime Minister ' s office . 
senator Graham amassed his first fortune writing for the Antigonish Casket when they paid by the column inch , but any spark of independent thought , much less of independent expression , was ruthlessly extinguished by a spell of service in the ministerial office of the Honourable Allan J . MacEachen . 
in advocating the appointment of another journalist to the Senate , I am talking about someone who is , as they say , " hot off the press " and who is now engaged in what is loosely described in the world of journalism as full - time employment . 
i trust honourable senators are under no illusion , and do not think I am under any illusion , that appointing another journalist to this place will improve our media coverage . 
indeed not . 
in fact , choosing one of their number over the many journalists who are aspirants to a seat in the Senate just makes the others more resentful and their coverage of our activities more bilious and virulent . 
theirs is not the gentle , good - natured envy that we sometimes remark among our compatriots as we make our appointed rounds of the country . 
the scorned " wannabee " senators in the gallery are so blind with bitterness and jealousy with regard to the Senate that it is almost pathological . 
senator Kinsella , who was trained in moral theology , would understand when I say that such covetousness is , objectively speaking , sinful . 
some of the pundits who long for a Senate seat desperately tried to draw our attention , and especially that of the Prime Minister , to their qualifications by pontificating almost daily on " all weighty and arduous matters which may the Senate and Defence of Canada concern . " 
as if they were in the Senate already . 
it is really rather pathetic . 
no , it is not in hope of getting decent media treatment for this place that I look for the appointment of another journalist to the Senate . 
it is , rather , because we senators respect tradition . 
you may say that this is a bad tradition , but I say that a bad tradition is better than no tradition at all . 
who , then , to fill the place of our esteemed emeritus colleague , Richard J . Doyle ? 
when it comes to Canadian media barons , there are not many left , a state of affairs inquired into by a previous Senate committee under Keith Davey , and by a royal commission under Tom Kent . 
there is Conrad Black , but he is understood to have his heart , if he has one , set on a seat in the British House of Lords , and would probably consider an appointment to the Canadian Senate a poor consolation prize ; and there is Kenneth Thompson , who is already a member of the upper house in the U . K . , having succeeded to his late father ' s peerage . 
which brings us to the present editor - in - chief of The Globe and Mail . 
while I cannot really claim to know Mr. Thorsell , I think it may be fairly said of him that he is a man who is endowed with a proper measure of ambition and even of vanity . 
some years ago , in one of those personally signed columns that adorn Saturday ' s editorial page in The Globe and Mail , Mr. Thorsell wrote of his boyhood years working in his grandfather ' s general store somewhere in Alberta . 
he did not credit God ' s mysterious providence , but throughout this piece there was a strong sense of conviction that his departure from rural Alberta to - eventually - the editorship of The Globe and Mail had been essential to his own fulfilment and a benefaction for humanity at large . 
with the utmost respect , I say that neither of these propositions is proven nor is capable of proof this side of the grave . 
who knows what Mr. Thorsell might have achieved had he stayed at the general store . 
as a Catholic , I can say with some confidence that he might have saved at least as many souls as manager or even assistant manager of the general store as he has done at The Globe and Mail , perhaps including his own . 
he might even have had a better chance of being appointed - or elected , as he would have it - to the Senate . 
here , he could have acquired the gift of linear thinking , which makes possible a perspective on life that is not just temporal but eternal . 
speaking of which , it will be a cold day in hell before Bill Thorsell is appointed to the Senate by Jean Chr é tien , unless the Prime Minister is taking advice from Preston Manning , which is unlikely . 
if Mr. Chr é tien is looking for a Liberal loyalist - and on his record to date , it is a safe assumption that he is - he will find them not on the editorial pages of The Globe and Mail but in its news columns . 
the name of Susan Delacourt springs to mind . 
Ms Delacourt has recently graduated from the news pages to the editorial staff , and Mr. Chr é tien may want to leave her there , believing that he is entitled to a break from that quarter at long last . 
but let me , on her behalf , testify to her steadfast loyalty to the Liberal cause , in good times and bad , uninfluenced in her reporting by current fashion , public opinion or even by uncongenial facts . 
this Liberal spinster - and I use the term in its current vogue , meaning as a propagandist rather than as a description of é tat civil , of which I know nothing - should not be long denied her reward . 
however , my duty of candour to the Prime Minister obliges me to note just one or two possible stains on an otherwise unblemished record of loyalty . 
she was a charter member of the Allan Rock supper club and leadership campaign committee . 
she later jumped to the Paul Martin fan club and is now an honorary member of his campaign committee . 
i think we would all understand if the Prime Minister felt that these enthusiasms were a bit premature and if he sought other possible candidates for the Senate vacancy . 
fortunately , others come to mind . 
there is Graham Fraser , whose Liberal pedigree stretches back many generations to Cape Breton . 
with this background he should be on the Prime Minister ' s short list but , unfortunately , he seems to have developed a penchant for weighty analysis during his years as a foreign correspondent . 
this is not something highly esteemed in the Liberal whip ' s office , where it is regarded as evidence of unreliability with perhaps even a potential for mutiny . 
the Prime Minister ' s Senate appointments over the past four years indicate a remarkable preference for meritorious senior citizens . 
in that category , none is more deserving than Hugh Winsor , nor more devoted to the Liberal cause . 
however , with advancing age , Mr. Winsor ' s latent and perhaps hitherto repressed taste for la dolce vita has become all too painfully apparent . 
goodness knows we do not need another of those in here . 
it may be that the Prime Minister has decided regrettably , and perhaps regretfully , that there is no one quite suitable enough at The Globe and Mail to succeed Senator Doyle . 
what about other centres of journalistic thought ? 
there are , of course , the Sun papers in Toronto , Ottawa and Edmonton . 
Douglas Fisher , their " nostalgia " editor , appears regularly in those papers and is the dean of the Ottawa pundits . 
he routinely excoriates the Senate , but I ask you , would he have accepted an appointment to this place had it been offered ? 
ha ! 
recently he has taken to advocating a freeze on salaries of honourable senators . 
however , I think it is significant that he slyly refrained from making any such proposal until he had passed his seventy - fifth birthday and thus became ineligible for appointment . 
he nursed his ambition in secret all those years , too proud to ask . 
now that he is nursing his hurt and frustration , I am sure we will hear more from this s é nateur manqu é , and none of it will be pleasant . 
it is probably just as well he was not appointed . 
the Senate is no place for people who are pompous and opinionated . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator ' s time has expired . 
is leave granted to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
Yes. 
senator Murray : 
i do not wish to impose on honourable senators , but this is an important subject . 
finally , there is The Toronto Star . 
how could successive Liberal Prime Ministers have overlooked the Star and its loyalty to the Liberal Party in season and out ? 
could it be that , like so many millions outside Metro Toronto , they do not read it ? 
well , they are missing something . 
first , they are missing Richard Gwyn . 
Mr. Gwyn was a member of the Ottawa establishment for so long that people who do not read the Star may be forgiven for thinking that he died with Mackenzie King . 
those who do read the Star may be forgiven for thinking his columns have been recycled from that era . 
also a columnist with the Star is Dalton Camp . 
like Mr. Fisher , he has passed the age of eligibility . 
in other words , he is too old . 
if I may say so as a devoted friend and advisor , he is too far left for today ' s Liberal Party and too cranky for this chamber of serene and sober second thought . 
in the Sunday Star , there appears a thought - provoking if sometimes overwrought and overwritten column by Michelle Lansberg . 
Ms Lansberg is often a bit tendentious when writing about social matters , but quite charming when describing everyday experiences of life . 
one such column that appeared several years ago related the strategy she had devised against the squirrels that were invading the bird feeders in her backyard . 
as this is an experience known to many , urban dweller and country person alike , the column conveyed an empathy which was warmly reciprocated by the reader . 
it also confirmed the existence in Ms Lansberg of a nice killer instinct where rodents are concerned which , under appropriate circumstances , is not entirely out of place in politics , not even in the Senate . 
my late father - in - law , who was a warden in the Cape Breton Highlands National Park , used to say that the squirrel was first cousin to a rat , and I believe he was right . 
again I digress . 
Ms Lansberg would make a fine senator , but Mr. Chr é tien should be advised that she is probably NDP . 
all of these candidates are worthy of consideration but , as honourable senators will have noted , none is without flaw . 
as close as I can come to a flawless candidate from Mr. Chr é tien ' s point of view , is John Honderich , the publisher of The Toronto Star . 
Mr. Honderich has everything going for him . 
or is it a plank ? 
i can never remember . 
not long after the Second World War , the Star described a political alliance between the Tory premier of Ontario and the Union Nationale premier of Quebec as an " Axis , " borrowing the label which had been attached to the Hitler - Mussolini wartime Nazi front . 
he has indeed more than realized his earlier promise and he has gone far in his chosen field . 
he is a liberal whip ' s dream and he is ready for the Senate . 
if , for some reason , Mr. Honderich is unavailable or considered undesirable by the Prime Minister , two other names come to mind . 
a former editor of The Globe and Mail , and also of the Montreal Gazette , is Mr. Norman Webster . 
Mr. Webster had two grandfathers who sat in the Senate ; one as a Liberal , one as a Tory . 
Mr. Webster may thus be said to be doubly qualified for appointment to the Senate . 
after all , Senator Meighen and Senator Lynch - Staunton got here with only one grandfather who was a senator - one grandfather each , that is . 
i did not mean to imply that Senator Meighen and Senator Lynch - Staunton had the same grandfather . 
were that the case , Senator Meighen and Senator Lynch - Staunton would be cousins , which , obviously , they are not . 
the genetic pool in English Montreal may have thinned out somewhat in recent years , but it has never come to this , thank God ! 
again , I digress . 
speaking of " thinning out , " there is the case of Mr. Mike Duffy to be considered . 
it is understood that while Mr. Duffy would be honoured to sit as a senator from his native Prince Edward Island , he would not accept appointment as an Ontario senator . 
this , however , remains to be confirmed . 
in conclusion , while my favourite candidate is obviously Mr. Honderich , I thought it would be helpful to the Prime Minister if I gave him a brief sketch of others who would be on a Liberal short list for appointment to the vacant journalist ' s seat in the Senate . 
there are many vacant journalists but those who I have mentioned seem to me to be the most worthy . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I wish to ask the honourable senator how he can be so witty . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I wish to speak on this subject , but not today . 
however , I have a quick question for my honourable colleague . 
the honourable senator has forgotten to mention two people from Toronto . 
first , I wish to know his view on Ms Carol Goar . 
i will speak about her in my speech tomorrow . 
second , has he forgotten about Barbara Amiel ? 
does the honourable senator have any comments about whether or not these two people should be included on a short list ? 
senator Murray : 
concerning the latter , her husband is a candidate for the British House of Lords . 
i do not think it would be possible for her to accept an appointment to the Canadian Senate . 
as for Ms Goar , I must confess that I overlooked her . 
the Prime Minister has shown great preference for appointing women to the Senate and commendably so . 
if Mr. Honderich is willing to stand down , Ms Goar might be available . 
i encourage my friend to place her qualifications before the Senate at the first opportunity . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
the honourable senator mentioned that Ms Amiel ' s husband is a candidate for the House of Lords . 
how can we reconcile the possibility that he is a member of the Queen ' s Privy Council for Canada and a member of the British House of Lords ? 
i was appointed the same day as Mr. Black was appointed by the Queen , namely , July , 1992 . 
he was sitting with me and we were happy to be members of the Privy Council of Queen Elizabeth II , Queen of Canada . 
Mr. Black told me at that time that free trade was the first step . 
he said that first there should be economic union , and then it would make sense to eventually have political union . 
i am confused as to Mr. Black ' s future . 
would the honourable senator enlighten me ? 
senator Murray : 
naturally , I thought about that a great deal . 
the Honourable Conrad Black is indeed a member of the Queen ' s Privy Council for Canada . 
my researchers indicate that there is a precedent in that the Duke of Edinburgh is a member of the Canadian Privy Council and also a member of the House of Lords . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator has made reference to his research . 
did his researchers come across an interesting series of articles or comments about another media - worthy Ontarian who has requested to be a member of the Senate and would not feign to let this cup pass from his lips ? 
has the honourable senator come across that piece of research ? 
senator Murray : 
i do not know . 
senator Grafstein : 
i just criticized Senator Di Nino for his lack of research and here we have Senator Murray doing the same thing . 
if he would make a careful analysis of the research he would find that Mr. Larry Zolf has made application to the Senate of Canada time and time again . 
senator Murray : 
Mr. Zolf is a native of Manitoba and I think he should look there first . 
senator Grafstein : 
he is president of the CBC in Ontario and he would be considered a resident for the purpose of the Senate . 
on motion of Senator Prud ' homme , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 49 
Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
universal Declaration of Human Rights 
issuance by Canada Post of Stamp Honouring Professor John Peters Humphrey to Commemorate Fiftieth Anniversary 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
first Nations Government Bill 
first Reading 
the Holocaust 
statement Issued by Vatican Viewed as Teaching Document - Notice of Inquiry 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
sixteenth Report of Committee Presented 
seventeenth Report of Committee Presented 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists in War in Uganda - Government Position 
national Finance 
changes to Rules on Guaranteed Income Supplement regarding Casual Earnings of Seniors - Government Position 
Nova Scotia 
future Use of Shearwater Base as Free Trade Zone - Government Position 
results of Yesterday ' s Provincial Election - Government Position 
post - Secondary Education 
millennium Scholarships - Restriction on Funds for Students Studying Abroad - Government Position 
energy 
power Generation Facility to be Built on Lower Churchill River , Newfoundland - Availability of Federal Funds - Government Position 
goods and Services Tax 
results of Yesterday ' s Provincial Election in Nova Scotia - Possible Abolition of Blended Sales Tax - Government Position 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
business of the Senate 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned Awaiting Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( B ) Adopted 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
second Reading 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned to Await Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order 
visitors in the Gallery 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
universal Declaration of Human Rights 
issuance by Canada Post of Stamp Honouring Professor John Peters Humphrey to Commemorate Fiftieth Anniversary 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Oppsoition ) : 
honourable senators , you may recall that last year we raised the matter of the desirability of Canada Post issuing a special commemorative stamp marking the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and , in particular , the contribution of a distinguished Canadian , John P . Humphrey , who prepared the first draft of this universal standard of human rights . 
honourable senators may also recall that we asked the Leader of the Government in the Senate , during a Question Period , to bring our representation in this regard to the attention of the government and Canada Post . 
this , the honourable minister agreed to do . 
colleagues , the following letter has been received from the Honourable Andr é Ouellet , Chairman of the Board of Canada Post . 
i would like to read it : 
dear Senator Kinsella : 
as Chairman of the Stamp Advisory Committee , I am pleased to inform you that your suggestion that we issue a commemorative stamp in 1998 on John Humphrey was approved by the committee . 
honourable senators , I want to thank the minister . 
notwithstanding what some say about this honourable chamber , our representations are heard and , in this instance , acted upon in a very appropriate manner . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
telecommunications Act Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
hon. Lise Bacon , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications has the honour to present its 
fifth REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill C - 17 , an Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , has , in obedience to the Order of Reference of Tuesday , March 24 , 1998 , examined the said Bill and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
first Nations Government Bill 
first Reading 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present Bill S - 14 , entitled An Act providing for self - government by the First Nations of Canada . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Tkachuk , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 . 
the Holocaust 
statement Issued by Vatican Viewed as Teaching Document - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , March 31 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the statement of the Vatican on the Holocaust as a teaching document . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
sixteenth Report of Committee Presented 
leave having been given to revert to Reports from Standing Committees : 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
sixteenth REPORT 
your committee has examined and approved the budget presented to it by the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access for the proposed expenditures of the said committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 : 
( senate ' s Share ) 
professional and Special Services $ 1,815 
transport and Communications 7,530 
all Other Expenditures 150 
witness Expenses 3,150 
total $ 12,645 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
seventeenth Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chair of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to present its 
seventeenth REPORT 
your committee has examined and approved the budget presented to it by the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access for the proposed expenditures of the said committee for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 : 
( senate ' s Share ) 
professional and Special Services $ 16,035 
transport and Communications 87,870 
all Other Expenditures 2,025 
witness Expenses 23,850 
printing 7,500 
total $ 137,280 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists in War in Uganda - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last Sunday , the television program 60 Minutes presented a devastating piece with regard to Ugandan rebels using children as human shields . 
even worse than that , these rebels are kidnapping children and turning them into murderers on the basis that if they do not do what they are told , they will be killed . 
i do not know whether governments around the world were aware of the significance of this . 
is the government aware , or has it been aware of the situation that is so serious there ? 
if so , what would the government be doing in their relationship with Uganda to try to correct the devastating situation that appears to be taking place in that country ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i thank the honourable senator for his question . 
the events in Uganda are obviously shocking . 
the situation is reprehensible . 
60 Minutes brought information to the public at large , some new , perhaps unknown , but certainly suspected revelations as to the atrocities that have taken place in that country . 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs is now more aware of the situation . 
i know that there have been discussions in this respect with officials at the Department of Foreign Affairs . 
i would be happy to bring forward to the Honourable Senator Atkins any further information that might be available with respect to Canada ' s position in relation to Uganda . 
national Finance 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , my question concerns the guaranteed income supplement and the new definition of income that is incorporated in Bill C - 36 , the budget implementation bill . 
changes to the rules in the GIS program are important to our seniors , since they affect the poorest and most vulnerable of Canada ' s seniors . 
the GIS has a steep benefit clawback of 50 cents for every dollar of income . 
under section 13 of the Old Age Security Act , the definition of income for GIS purposes is the same definition used in the Income Tax Act , minus various other amounts . 
one of these amounts is a deduction of one - fifth of the first $ 2,500 of employment earnings . 
for example , if a senior citizen earns $ 2,500 part time over a year , only $ 2,000 is added to income for GIS purposes . 
this increases to $ 500 the amount of income eligible for clawback purposes , and thus $ 250 off the amount that is clawed back . 
in addition , if a senior pays Employment Insurance or Canada Pension Plan premiums on these earnings , these are also deducted from income used in calculating benefits . 
as of July 1999 , section 13 and its exemptions will be replaced by a new definition that does not include a break for casual earnings or payroll taxes . 
can the minister tell to us whether the failure to include these exemptions in the new income definition is an oversight or a deliberate policy decision ? 
if it is a deliberate policy decision , could he also report as to how many seniors are affected and as to the dollar amounts involved ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this is an interesting and complicated question . 
honourable senators will know that the bill is now before the House of Commons . 
in fact , I understand it received second reading yesterday in the other place . 
perhaps it would be more appropriate for Senator Tkachuk and his committee to give the bill a proper examination when it comes before the Senate . 
at any rate , in the interim period , I will attempt to obtain a more up - to - date answer to his question . 
war Veterans Allowance Program - Changes to Regulations Governing Casual Earnings - Government Position 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question : 
the income test for the War Veterans Allowance Program is similar to the income test for the guaranteed income supplement . 
however , in the case of veterans , the income exclusions are set through regulation . 
could the Leader of the Government provide assurances that the government will not , through regulation , alter the allowable casual earnings under the War Veterans Allowance Program to mirror the new GIS definition of income ? 
w ( 1350 ) 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i do not believe that that is the intention of the government , but I shall include that aspect in my answer as well . 
Nova Scotia 
future Use of Shearwater Base as Free Trade Zone - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
i have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it is a question I am sure Dr. Savage would have liked to have put , but I do not see him with us just yet . 
can the minister for all Nova Scotia tell us if there is any truth to the reports that the Department of National Defence property on the south side of the Shearwater base , principally the carrier base , the pier , and the adjunct storage area , is to be turned over to the private sector for the purpose of setting up a free trade zone in Halifax ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I know that discussions are going on with respect to the possible options for the future use of the Shearwater base , certainly with regard to its industrial development capacity . 
in any negotiations that would naturally proceed with respect to the pier , of course , the armed forces would have first call on the pier . 
with respect to the honourable senator ' s suggestion regarding a free trade zone , I am not aware of any formal discussions having taken place on that particular subject . 
senator Forrestall : 
the concern , of course , is that it is the principal tie - up area for visiting nuclear submarines , and any impairment of that capacity , which embraces the security of those visiting vessels , would be somewhat detrimental to our relations within NATO . 
senator Graham : 
i assure my honourable friend that the armed forces are very cognizant of the situation he has described and that they would take every measure to ensure that the special interests of our allies are protected in that regard . 
results of Yesterday ' s Provincial Election - Government Position 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it the wish of the Senate that I ask for silence now ? 
senator Graham : 
if we are talking about seven seconds for the Conservative Party , yes ; but if we are talking about seven seconds for the Liberal party , no . 
since Senator Murray could not resist the temptation of raising the issue , I think that we should pay tribute to the people who took part in the election in Nova Scotia . I include all three leaders and all of their supporters . 
premier MacLellan , Robert Chisholm , the leader of the New Democratic Party , and Dr. Hamm , the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party , all deserve our congratulations and support . 
our real sense of appreciation should go to the electorate and to the democratic process itself . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
are you asking for a recount ? 
senator Graham : 
having observed elections all over the world , I cannot recall a more intriguing result of the democratic electoral process at work . 
i believe it is a result that mirrors the concerns of voters . 
it honoured the parties and their leaders , and it will ensure that politics will remain very interesting in my home province for many months and years to come . 
senator Forrestall : 
you will notice the restraint being practised on this side of the chamber . 
post - Secondary Education 
millennium Scholarships - Restriction on Funds for Students Studying Abroad - Government Position 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , Bill C - 36 , which implements the millennium scholarship , restricts scholarship recipients to attending degree - granting institutions in Canada . 
could the Leader of the Government explain why students will be prohibited from using these funds to study at institutions outside of Canada ? 
what considerations led the government to this policy decision ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is a valid point that has been raised by my honourable friend , who has long - standing interest in educational matters . 
it is certainly a valid question . 
i shall attempt to bring forward an answer to her question . 
senator Cochrane : 
honourable senators , this is discrimination against Canadian students who wish to combine their education with the experience of living in another country . 
Canadian governments and post - secondary institutions encourage students from other countries to take advantage of the experience of studying in Canada . 
we have always expressed admiration , to give one example , for Rhodes Scholars who travel to Great Britain for part of their education . 
how can the government justify this restriction in the millennium scholarships ? 
senator Graham : 
energy 
power Generation Facility to be Built on Lower Churchill River , Newfoundland - Availability of Federal Funds - Government Position 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask the government leader a question with respect to a meeting that was held at Churchill Falls , Newfoundland , on March 9 , between Premier Tobin and Premier Bouchard . 
at that meeting , they announced that they were entering negotiations to build a $ 12 - billion power generation project on the Lower Churchill and that part of their plans included a $ 2 - billion , 800 - kilowatt transmission line from Labrador to Newfoundland . 
the information that was given to the media at that point was that the federal government would be expected to finance the $ 2 - billion transmission line . 
on what basis might it participate in this project ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that any specific commitments have been made with respect to the capital project itself . 
goods and Services Tax 
results of Yesterday ' s Provincial Election in Nova Scotia - Possible Abolition of Blended Sales Tax - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in light of the results of the election in Nova Scotia yesterday , will the Government of Canada agree should the Province of Nova Scotia bring forward a request to abolish the blended sales tax ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not know if the honourable senator means that to be a light - hearted or a loaded question , but it is heavy - duty . 
i am not aware of any particular agreement or intention on the part of the Government of Canada in that respect . 
w ( 1400 ) 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call Orders of the Day , I wish to draw to your attention the second page from our exchange program with the House of Commons . 
yesterday I introduced the first page . 
today we have with us Charelle Racicot from Battleford , Saskatchewan . She is pursuing her studies in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Ottawa , majoring in English . 
we wish you welcome to the Senate . 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should also like to remind you that at 5:30 today there will be a special reception in the lobby of the Senate for the unveiling of a painting which has been given to the Senate by one of our colleagues , Senator Joyal , in honour of a previous Speaker , Senator Marchand . 
i believe all of you have received invitations . 
i hope to see you at 5:30 in the lobby . 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned Awaiting Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order 
on the Order : 
motion of the Honourable Senator Kenny , seconded by the Honourable Senator Nolin , for the second reading of Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsiblity Foundation . - ( 
speaker ' s Ruling ) . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , a point of order is presently before His Honour for decision relating to Bill S - 13 . 
you will recall that during debate on the point of order , it was indicated that because the matter was under debate and the point of order had just been raised , some of us wanted to go to the literature and do some research . 
his Honour queried us on whether or not that suggestion would meet with favour , and it was not taken up . 
if new material on a point of order comes to the attention of an honourable senator , is there a procedure whereby that material can be brought to His Honour ' s attention , either by way of a statement in the chamber before His Honour rules on the matter , or by way of a communication in writing to His Honour ? 
if such a situation did present itself , would it be considered out of order to make a submission in writing to His Honour , or should it be raised here , or is the matter indeed closed ? 
for example , in the matter under consideration , the issue of a private bill versus a public bill came to mind , and that was not part of the debate . 
would it be in order for a submission to be made once a matter is in the hands of His Honour for decision ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
do any other honourable senators wish to speak to the point of order ? 
if no one wishes to speak , then perhaps I can speak now . 
as honourable senators know , the question is still before the Senate . 
however , this is a very important item , as one will recall from the observations made at the time by honourable senators . 
if there is further information , I think it would be to the benefit of the Senate to hear it . 
if it is agreeable to the Senate , I would be quite prepared , when the item is called in my name as the Speaker , to have further deliberation at that point . 
however , I can only do that with agreement of the Senate . 
i think it would be to the advantage of the Senate to hear any further contributions . 
i remind honourable senators that this is a serious and important issue from a democratic standpoint as it bears on the powers of this house to introduce matters before the house , not to be restricted unduly by the Royal Recommendation . 
on that basis , if it is agreeable , when we reach that point on the Order Paper , I will ask for further contributions . 
is that agreeable , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
honourable senators , I would like to speak to Bill C - 21 , to amend the Small Business Loans Act . 
after serious reflection , I have decided to vote in favour of this bill . 
my decision is based on the fact that small - and medium - sized businesses play a vital role in Canada and in the Canadian economy . 
while supporting Bill C - 21 , I am well aware that the Small Business Loans Program is far from perfect . 
if we were to put an end to this program , which is essentially what we would do if we rejected Bill C - 21 , we would overthrow the entire set of financial instruments that have been created to support small business . 
no one would gain , and the small businesses which need access to non - conventional funding sources would suffer . 
the program is very popular , with the business sector and such groups as the Canadian Federation of Independent Business and the Chamber of Commerce in particular . 
honourable senators , small business plays a vital role in the Canadian economy . 
canada has more than 2.5 million small businesses , including self - employed individuals . 
businesses with 100 employees or less account for 50 per cent of all private sector employment and 43 per cent of private sector output . 
small businesses created 81 per cent of new jobs in 1996 - 97 . 
the objective of the Small Business Loans Program is to increase the availability of loans for the establishment , expansion , modernization and improvement of small business enterprises by encouraging lending institutions to make such loans . 
these fixed - asset loans are available for such things as the purchase of land or equipment , or for making improvements to buildings or leaseholds . 
they are not available for the purpose of financing the purchase of shares , working capital or existing debt , and they are not based upon good will or other intangibles . 
eligible borrowers include for - profit businesses with gross annual revenue of $ 5 million or less . 
farming operations which benefit from a similar but separate program , and religious and non - profit organizations , are excluded from the program . 
in 1995 - 96 , for example , over 30,000 businesses turned to the program . 
according to borrowers themselves , the loans they obtained helped them create 73,000 jobs . 
the bill would do two things : it would amend the Small Business Loans Act by extending the period for which loans could be approved until March 31 , 1999 ; and it would add $ 1 billion to the program envelope , increasing it from $ 14 billion to $ 15 billion . 
honourable senators , unless we pass Bill C - 21 , it will not be possible to approve any new loans under the program after March 31 , 1998 . This would be very bad news for the small businesses of the country . 
in my view , the Senate must consider this bill a temporary measure making it possible to continue the Small Business Loans Program and to meet the needs of SMBs for another year , while a detailed examination of the program is carried out . 
if we were to extend the present loan approval period without any increase in the envelope , loans under this program would have to cease towards the end of October 1998 . 
w ( 1410 ) 
the program would then wind up in a disorderly manner . 
since it takes lenders several months to register the loans made , hundreds , not to say thousands , of loans would be made by lenders trying to have them approved at the last minute . 
the majority of these loans would have to refinanced if possible and , if not , the lender would require them to be paid back , which would put many small businesses in difficult situations . 
to extend the loan approval period without increasing the budget envelope at the same time would in fact kill the bill before us . 
i do not think it is the Senate ' s wish to leave Canadian small business in the lurch by taking away this useful financing tool . 
while I support Bill C - 21 , I do realize that the Small Business Loans Program contains flaws which will have to be remedied . 
i know , however , that the Auditor General of Canada has stated that , overall and in spite of these flaws , the program is managed efficiently and meets a real need . 
it is encouraging to see that this comprehensive review of the program is an excellent opportunity for us to take a closer look at it . 
the people of Canada in particular will take advantage of this review to give some thought to the problem areas to which the Auditor General has drawn attention . 
the question of incrementality has been raised as to whether the loans granted under the program are well targeted and whether they would have been made by the financial institutions anyway , even without the program . 
there is no doubt that some loans have been guaranteed that might have been made outside the program . 
the SLBA is a form of insurance against default , under which private sector lending institutions assess businesses and make or refuse loans . 
like many other insurance programs , it pools risks across thousands of users . 
as with any insurance program , there are likely to be loans that actually do not need to be guaranteed . 
for the most part , these are loans that will probably be paid back and therefore do not cost taxpayers anything . 
in fact , a certain percentage of the loans made under the program actually help make the program affordable and sustainable . 
it is relevant to point out that since steps were taken in 1995 to move the program toward cost recovery , firms that benefit from the program must pay fees that are designed to recover the cost of loan claims . 
therefore , any business that uses the program even if it does not need the loss insurance provided is in effect sharing the risk of lending to small businesses which need the program . 
i want to go back to the Auditor General ' s report . 
honourable senators will remember that , when the report was tabled in December , the government had already followed up on some of the recommendations made . 
other issues , including that of incrementality , will surely be debated during the comprehensive review . 
when the Auditor General testified before the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons in February , he was asked many questions on the conclusions and the recommendations found in the report . 
there are three points that should be repeated here . 
first , as I already mentioned , the Auditor General stated that , overall , the Small Business Loans Program was well managed , but that its objectives should be more specific . 
second , he said he would not ask for another audit - contrary to what he usually does - within two years after the tabling of his report . 
instead , he will consider giving more time to Industry Canada to provide answers to the issues raised in the comprehensive review . 
third , the Auditor General recognized that it was difficult to provide an answer regarding how many jobs will be created through the program , and that estimates in this regard vary widely . 
i already explained to honourable senators that Industry Canada had based its estimates on the figures provided by the businesses that got loans under the program . 
the Small Business Loans Program has been in place since 1961 and all the governments that have been in office since , regardless of the political party , have maintained it . 
they have reviewed the program on a regular basis to improve it and to modernize it . 
if the program needs to be changed , we make the changes during detailed examination . 
furthermore , if the best solution would be to drop the program , the examination will make this clear . 
in the meantime , honourable senators , I hope you will pass Bill C - 21 for the greater good of Canada ' s small businesses . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
senator Hervieux - Payette : 
yes , I would call it a transitional measure , which will provide us with the examination report and enable us to change the legislation from A to Z as the result of the examination and the recommendations of the Auditor General . 
senator Nolin : 
i listened carefully to your speech and wonder whether , given the scope of the clientele served by this program , you would be prepared to recommend to this house that the examination take place not only in Ottawa but also across Canada to enable us to reach the maximum clientele served by such a program ? 
this clientele will evaluate the changes or the cancellation of this program if it fails to meet their needs . 
senator Hervieux - Payette : 
i do not chair the committee examining these questions . 
all I can say is that when those being served have expressed the interest , our committee has not hesitated to tour the country . 
we are just back from consultations on the new agency managing pension funds . 
at the time the study is done , I am sure the committee chair will consider the possibility with your colleague , the deputy chair of our committee . 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to speak on Bill C - 21 , to amend the Small Business Loans Act . 
this side of the house is in favour of this legislation but , in general , we are not very happy with the manner in which it has come to us . 
however , I will speak to that later . 
this legislation was introduced in 1961 by the Diefenbaker government . 
the loans from 1961 through 1980 were modest . 
from 1980 to 1993 , the program under the act provided for 90 per cent financing , up to a total of $ 100,000 , of loans to small business by lenders other than the government . 
eligible companies had to have sales of less than $ 2 million per year . 
the borrower at that time was to be charged not more than prime , plus 1 per cent . 
the borrower also paid a one - time registration fee of 1 per cent of the value of the loan . 
w ( 1420 ) 
the government guaranteed the lender 85 per cent of the cost of eligible claims , which worked as follows . 
the historical experience has been exceptional . 
during the first 31 years of the program , the cost to the government was almost insignificant , but for the five - year period before 1993 , the average cost claimed was about $ 36 million per year , which represents about 4 to 6 per cent of the loans . 
this cost of $ 36 million does not take into account the amount of revenue taken in by the government as a result of the program , or additional tax revenues generated by the newly created jobs - that is , for those who were employed and for those whose business was increased , presumably as a result of the loan . 
there seems to be no argument that small business in Canada is one of the most dynamic sectors of the economy . 
firms with fewer than 15 employees created 81 per cent of the new jobs last year - up from 70 per cent the year before . 
the program has always been limited in that it allows borrowing only for the purchase of new land , to purchase and / or improve premises - and that includes leasehold improvements - and to purchase equipment . 
it is the view of some business persons that the government should consider extending the application of this act so that it would apply to share acquisitions , working capital and other matters . 
as already explained , the loans are not made by the government directly but are made by authorized private sector financial institutions , including chartered banks , trust companies , caisse populaires , credit unions and others , with a combined total of approximately 13,000 branches across Canada . 
the act is now intended to apply to businesses with sales of less than $ 5 million - it used to be less than $ 2 million - in the year of the loan . 
the exceptions are for farms and for organizations of a charitable or religious nature . 
as mentioned earlier , there are other programs for farming enterprises . 
in 1997 , 30,000 firms obtained loans under this program , for a combined total of $ 2 billion . 
there are two areas of concern in relation to this program . 
first , those who take advantage of the program - both lenders and borrowers - do so by sometimes splitting their activity within their business and incorporating another company or another enterprise of some kind , and thereby , in the case of the borrowers , receiving two loans when they are only entitled to one . 
as well , insofar as both borrowers and lenders are concerned , this act is used on numerous occasions for the purpose of borrowing when , in fact , the loan probably could have been made under ordinary circumstances . 
loans under this act are not meant to be the kinds of loans that are given in the usual course of business by a branch of any lending institution . 
the act is meant to apply where small businesses cannot obtain loans from any other source . 
when the review is made , I hope that those concerned will look into this aspect to determine whether they can tighten up the regulations so that those who truly need the money will get it . 
the minister in the other place made reference to the fact that the previous government relaxed the ceiling on the amounts of the loans in such a way that it created a great debt to the government . 
i will use the same figures as before to give you an example of the amount of money involved here : 
however , the percentage of default is still somewhere in the 4 and 6 per cent range . 
because of the increase in the amount of the maximum loan to $ 250,000 and the amount of the guarantee , where the borrower was not at risk except for his asset but was borrowing 100 per cent , borrowers and lenders came in droves . 
this resulted in loans of $ 2.5 billion in 1993 - 94 , and $ 4.4 billion in 1994 - 95 . 
because of the increase in the amounts involved , the dollar amount of the defaults also significantly increased . 
i am told that is still at 4 to 6 per cent of the loans . 
whereas the average was $ 36 million a year , is it estimated that , in the 1997 - 98 fiscal year , claims will increase to $ 241.8 million . 
that is a large figure . 
however , the government does not know how many jobs have been created by this lending , nor does the claim figure take into account revenues received from the program . 
as I said earlier , the government thought that the previous government should have relaxed these loans . 
in 1995 - two years after this government took office - the government decided that , in view of the increased claims and the cost to government because of default , it would revert back to allowing lenders to lend 90 per cent of the value of the assets , and the government would guarantee only 80 per cent of the amount of the loan . 
however , the maximum amount of a loan still remained at $ 250,000 . 
in 1995 , this government increased the amount of the interest that could be charged to 3 per cent over prime , plus a 1.25 - per - cent annual administration fee . 
that is an important figure , because it hits right at the borrower . 
that fee would be passed on to the borrower through the increase in the interest rate . 
if the offsetting revenues from increased jobs , which were created by the relaxed lending provisions between 1993 and 1995 , did not justify the increased cost to the government , the action taken by the government in 1995 may prove to be prudent . 
on the other hand , if the jobs created and the revenues received as a result of such relaxation did justify the increased cost to government , it may not have been in the interests of small business and the creation of jobs to revert to the pre - 1993 rules , plus the extra 1.25 - per - cent annual administration fee , plus the extra amount of interest above prime . 
in any event , the change in the rules took place in the spring of 1993 . This government took over in the fall of that year . 
there was nothing to stop them from immediately amending the rules as they saw fit when they took over the government . 
it did not take them long to cancel the Pearson airport agreements , at an eventual cost to taxpayers of about $ 800 million . 
it took them but a few days to cancel the helicopter contract , at a cost of $ 500 million , not to mention all the jobs that went with those contracts . 
w ( 1430 ) 
i would like to give honourable senators some idea of how many jobs are created by these amounts of money . 
in 1993 , the lending was $ 4.4 billion , or $ 4,400 million . 
using the Auditor General ' s very conservative figure , every $ 1 million creates seven jobs . 
therefore , $ 4,400 million creates 30,800 jobs . 
it is estimated that each job will bring approximately $ 30,000 in income to the employee , with $ 7,500 per year paid in taxes , including income tax , GST , et cetera . 
therefore , although the cost to government was about $ 241 million , on those figures the government would take in at least $ 231 million , not taking into account the extra revenues the companies would earn as a result of increased business . 
if the study concludes that as a result of these loans $ 1 million creates 37 jobs rather than seven jobs , which is what the department responsible for this act is saying , that would be a boon to the economy . 
there is no question that there are other things the government could do . 
i suggest that it might lower employment insurance premiums , CPP premiums and other payroll taxes . 
that would be an incentive to small business . 
another matter the government might consider is the $ 200,000 small business deduction which was introduced in 1984 and has not been touched since . 
we have received this bill today ; it will go to committee tomorrow . 
in a mere six days , on March 31 , this lending expires . 
this would be only a housekeeping matter if we knew that it worked . 
it probably does work , but the government has had this bill since December of 1997 , and we are being allowed to study it in committee for probably one hour , at the most . 
that is just not good enough . 
i ask the government to give us a chance to properly study bills of this magnitude . 
the suggestion is that we should just renew it for another year ; put up another $ 1 billion . 
i think it might be good business to do so , but we do not know for certain . 
there is a study ongoing . 
the Auditor General has suggested that we should look at many things . 
the results of that study will not get back to the House of Commons until the fall . 
by the time the study is completed , we may be in the same position next year . 
perhaps the Senate committee should suggest to the government that rather than an extension of one year , it should be 18 months or two years . 
otherwise , we will find ourselves in exactly the same position next year if the study is not completed . 
the money will have been lent again and we will still not know where we are , and thus we will need another extension . 
this is an important bill . 
we can do nothing but pass it , and extend it as I have suggested . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carney , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
the Estimates , 1997 - 98 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( B ) Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance ( Supplementary Estimates ( B ) 1997 - 98 ) presented in the Senate on March 24 , 1998 . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the report ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
second Reading 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to second reading of Bill C - 33 , which will grant to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1998 , only a few days from now . 
when passed into law , Bill C - 33 will be cited as Appropriation Act No. 3 , 1997 - 98 . 
bill C - 33 seeks approval to grant to Her Majesty certain sums of money - being $ 1.1 billion - for the remainder of this fiscal year ending March 31 , 1998 . Bill C - 33 embodies Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 and provides for the release of the whole amount set out in these Supplementary Estimates which is , as I have said , just over $ 1 billion . 
therefore , total projected expenditures for 1997 - 98 under the Main Estimates , Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , and now Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , are expected to be $ 147.5 billion . 
honourable senators will be pleased to note that these Supplementary Estimates ( B ) indicate a net reduction in expenditures of about $ 3.8 billion . 
consequently , the total budgetary expenditure for the current fiscal year , ending March 31 , 1998 , is expected to be $ 1.7 billion less than had been projected in the Main Estimates at the beginning of this fiscal year , April 1 , 1997 . 
the government has shown sound fiscal management and clearly deserves credit for it . 
i thank him on behalf of all senators here . 
honourable senators , as we know , Supplementary Estimates are proposed expenditures for items that were unforeseen or not contemplated when the Main Estimates were presented . 
supplementary Estimates identify new items of proposed expenditure and also identify adjustments to proposed expenditures which have already been approved in preceding appropriations acts . 
parliamentary authority is necessary whenever the government proposes to exceed spending in one area of activity and to obtain the needed funds from surplus funds elsewhere . 
the government must first obtain Parliament ' s approval for such transfers . 
parliamentary approval , that is parliamentary authority , for such transfers is essential to ensure the government ' s accountability . 
as a matter of fact , Parliament ' s primary function is to ensure the control of the public purse and to hold the government responsible to Parliament for the expenditure of public moneys . 
the government is requesting approval to transfer $ 328 million in this way . 
w ( 1440 ) 
treasury Board Secretariat officials , Mr. Richard Neville and Mr. Andrew Lieff , appeared before the committee and responded to questions from senators . 
supplementary Estimates ( B ) were approved in the National Finance Committee on March 19 , and I introduced our committee ' s third report in this chamber on March 24 , 1998 . As honourable senators know , we adopted that report a few moments ago . 
honourable senators , some of the major items in these Supplementary Estimates ( B ) are : $ 148 million for three departments and agencies related to the January 1998 ice storm , which affected eastern Ontario , southern Quebec and New Brunswick ; $ 121.8 million for 11 departments and agencies related to departure incentives for public service employees ; $ 118.8 million for 14 departments and agencies under the carry - forward provision to meet operational requirements originally provided for in 1996 - 97 . 
this provision reflects a feature of the government ' s approach to operating budgets intended to reduce year - end spending and improve cash management . 
it allows managers to carry forward from one fiscal year to the next an amount of up to five per cent of the operating budget of the previous fiscal year . 
the operating budget includes salaries , operating expenses and minor capital expenditures . 
honourable senators , these major items represent $ 816.6 million of the $ 1.1 billion , or 77 per cent for which approval of Parliament is being sought . 
the $ 242.5 million balance is spread amongst a number of other departments , agencies and Crown corporations , the specific details of which are included in the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) . 
honourable senators , our committee was mindful of the very tight time - frame and the fact that the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) , 1997 - 98 and Bill C - 33 must be adopted and receive Royal Assent by March 31 , 1998 . This supply process must be completed by March 31 , 1998 , so that the government can meet its financial obligations . 
in committee , senators on both sides were supportive to this end . 
i should like to thank the chairman of the committee , Senator Stratton , and indeed all the senators on the committee for their wholehearted and , I would say , notable cooperation . 
with their help and dedication , the committee was able to conduct its hearings and adopt its report unanimously in a very timely fashion , and that is obvious since we are giving the bill second reading today . 
honourable senators , Supplementary Estimates ( B ) describe the government ' s need and plan for additional supply as well as the government ' s need to move funds between expenditure envelopes previously approved by Parliament . 
i urge all honourable senators to support Bill C - 33 and therein give legal force to the Supplementary Estimates ( B ) for 1997 - 98 by passing Bill C - 33 . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Cools for that overview of the work of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance that did indeed examine the Supplementary Estimates in committee . 
it is very difficult to determine during the budget - setting process how much ministries should be budgeting if , after that exercise , regulations are made and if those regulations cost money . 
effectively , it is a form of appropriating funds by statute , not through the statute created by an act of Parliament but the regulations made under that statute . 
the officials did undertake to try to get us some information , first and foremost , on the regulations made during the fiscal year and , second , to the extent it is possible , to give us a dollar amount associated with these new regulations . 
it will be very interesting for us to look at that data once we receive it . 
otherwise , I feel Senator Cools has provided us with an accurate reflection of the work of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
w ( 1450 ) 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lucier , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cook , for the second reading of Bill C - 8 , respecting an accord between the Governments of Canada and the Yukon Territory relating to the administration and control of and legislative jurisdiction in respect of oil and gas . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , Bill C - 8 is certainly worthy of support in principle . 
at last , it will give the people of the Yukon something they have wanted for many years - the right to administer their oil and gas resources , the responsibility for those resources and a good portion of the revenues . 
more than a decade ago , a Progressive Conservative government - in particular , former minister Bill McKnight - began the process that this bill concludes . 
no political party now disputes the wisdom of giving the people north of 60 powers that are similar to the powers that some provinces have enjoyed for more than a century . 
a separate Yukon Territory was created 100 years ago , in 1898 . 
one hundred years is certainly long enough for Ottawa officials to make decisions long - distance . 
now is certainly the time to transfer the benefits of royalties in the order of $ 2 million a year to the people of the Yukon . 
many describe the legislative transfer contained in this bill as a transfer of province - like powers . 
that may be overstating the case . 
while the Yukon government will gain administrative authority , its future revenues from royalties will be capped at $ 3 million . 
the federal government acknowledges that the Yukon ' s oil and gas reserves are , for the most part , undeveloped . 
some suggest that the land north of 60 holds as much as half of this country ' s potential petroleum resources . 
it is hard to conceive of a province agreeing to cap its future royalty revenues in like fashion . 
under this bill , the federal government will also retain the power to take back its responsibilities on land needed to create national parks , to protect the environment and to settle the land claims of First Nations . 
the last point is critical . 
of the 14 First Nations , only six have reached final land claim settlements . 
while they are moving along at a better pace than land claims in many other parts of Canada , the take - back clause is essential to make sure we do not repeat the mistakes made decades ago in Western Canada . 
first Nations people in my province of Manitoba and elsewhere on the Prairies were the forgotten people when the federal government gave provinces authority over forestry , mining , hydro development , and oil and gas exploration through natural resources transfer acts which are part of our Constitution . 
for decades , First Nations in the west have seen their traditional lands devastated and their way of life destroyed by development . 
it continues to this day in my province , where timber cutting licences are granted to companies on land that First Nations have chosen for future land claims settlements . 
first Nations have turned to the courts , only to be told that the resources belong to the provinces . 
we must not make the same mistake in the Yukon . 
i am pleased that under the royalty sharing formula Yukon First Nations are guaranteed 50 per cent of the first $ 2 million of off - shore revenues . 
whether that formula is just , only time will tell . 
it is certainly far better than the guarantee given First Nations elsewhere , who were guaranteed nothing and have received nothing for loss of their traditional lands for hunting and fishing , and are rightfully deeply angry to see development on land they have selected for land claims settlements . 
i have one other point to raise on this bill . 
to my knowledge , it has not been raised elsewhere , either in the other place or in the media , although perhaps it has been raised in the deep background of negotiations . 
it concerns the relationship of this bill to the international foreign investment treaties that our current government is signing at a heavy pace . 
in February 1997 , when the Government of Canada filed its reservations to the proposed Multilateral Agreement on Investment - the proposed treaty with 28 other countries of the OECD - this bill was included on the government list of reservations . 
canada proposed to exempt measures implementing the Canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord . 
it proposed to exempt this bill from national treatment provisions of the MAI , and from its restrictions on performance requirements . 
the government does not want to guarantee to foreign investors the right to be treated the same as Canadian companies that invest in the region . 
the government does not want foreign investors to receive automatically the same subsidies or concessions given to Canadian developers , for example . 
it also does not want foreign investors to have the right to exploit oil and gas reserves in the Yukon without their promising to put money back into the region by hiring local people , or buying local goods and services , or transferring technology . 
many Canadians would agree with that . 
many Canadians believe that our natural resources should bring the best possible benefits to Canadians living closest to them , which is what we are saying in Bill C - 8 . 
in recent years Canada has signed or initialled these bilateral treaties with 24 other countries and is negotiating with 33 more . 
some treaties , like the one in force with Barbados since January 1997 , also claim an exemption for this bill . 
others , like the treaty with Argentina which came into force in 1993 , does not exclude this legislation . 
the treaty with Argentina locks Canada into a 15 - year agreement that is binding under international law . 
this raises two points which are questions , really : 
i would like to know whether the government plans to reopen long investment treaties which do not exempt this bill . 
i would also like to know what would prevent British Gas , Shell , Exxon International , and others who have affiliates in Argentina , from using the open door in bilateral treaties that the Government of Canada says it must close in the MAI . 
i hope this question of foreign investment , Canada ' s treaty obligations and future development in the Yukon will receive some attention . 
i hope to hear more from the government about the protection for this bill in particular in the course of our debate . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Lucier , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Affairs . 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned to Await Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order 
on the Order : 
motion of the Senator Kenny , seconded by the Honourable Senator Nolin , for the second reading of Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsiblity Foundation . - ( 
speaker ' s Ruling ) . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , the points I wish to raise speak to the matter of the determination of whether Bill S - 13 is a private bill or a public bill . 
i draw your attention to rule 4 ( 2 ) of the Rules of the Senate where " bill " is defined as follows : 
" bill " means a draft Act of Parliament and includes a private and a public bill ; 
i cannot find references in our rules to anything other than a private bill or a public bill . 
i find no reference to what , in other Parliaments , they speak of as hybrid bills - that is , a mixture of a private bill and a public bill . 
honourable senators , clause 32 ( 1 ) on page 12 of Bill S - 13 reads : 
the Foundation is established on behalf of the Canadian tobacco industry but is independent of it . 
the fact that this foundation is established on behalf of the Canadian tobacco industry leads me to worry that what we have here is something that , under normal circumstances , would have arisen by a petition from that private sector indicating that they would like to have this kind of a foundation . 
that clearly would be a matter for a private bill . 
if there is some logic to that analysis , the tobacco industry should be doing the petitioning . 
the clear wording says that this foundation is being established on behalf of the Canadian tobacco industry . 
to that extent , I believe that we have before us a private bill , not a public bill . 
in Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules and Forms , sixth edition , on page 286 , we are provided with the definition of a private bill . 
it reads : 
a private bill is solicited by the parties who are interested in promoting it and is founded upon a petition which must be duly deposited in accordance with the Standing Orders of the House . 
of course , Beauchesne is written with reference to the House of Commons , and we only draw on it to the extent that it helps us determine the kinds of precedents that we wish to establish . 
the next paragraph in this part of Beauchesne is entitled " Determining Whether Certain Bills Should Be Public or Private . " 
i quote : 
there are four principles which have been followed in determining whether a private bill should not be allowed to proceed as such , but should be introduced as a public bill ... 
i simply draw to the attention of His Honour that he might want to look at those four criteria . 
they are , quite briefly , that public policy is affected , if the bill proposes to amend or repeal public acts , the magnitude of the area and the multiplicity of the interests involved , et cetera . 
the other matter is that Bill S - 13 has as a basic purpose the establishment of a corporation and the granting to that corporation certain powers , including the power to collect levies . 
private bills are not uncommon in this chamber . 
many of the acts of incorporation used to be introduced in the Senate as a matter of course . 
on the other hand , perhaps one could argue that Bill S - 13 is a public bill because it has a public purpose . 
the trouble with that argument is that everything we do , even in acts of incorporation , has a public dimension to it . 
to that extent , all private legislation has some public purpose . 
however , in my judgment , a clear and distinct difference can be seen in the purpose , objective , and thrust of a private bill and a public bill . 
it seems to me that this bill looks very much like a private bill and not a public bill . 
bill S - 13 does not seem to amend or repeal other public acts . 
one cannot argue that there are no parties out there who are ready to introduce such a bill . 
clearly , the Canadian tobacco industry should be the ones to take this action , since the foundation is being established on their behalf . 
therefore , I ask His Honour to also focus on the issue of whether the bill is a public bill or a private bill or a mixture , and , if it is a mixture , whether we would be setting a precedent by accepting a hybrid bill . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
do any other honourable senators wish to participate ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I find the subject - matter interesting , but I find the procedure unusual . 
had I known that the issue would be reopened , I might have been able to prepare a few comments . 
to the extent of the procedure in reopening this point of order , I would have thought the honourable senator ' s point of order could have been raised - and should have been raised - when the bill was properly before us again , after the Speaker has ruled on the first point of order . 
the order would then be properly before us again , and an infinite number of points of order could be raised thereafter . 
in any case , to the extent that the process is very irregular , I would love to have a shot at it too , except that I am simply not ready to do so . 
if senators will allow me , I would be happy to adjourn this debate . 
as this situation is unusual , perhaps we can be doubly unusual . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i do not think I can accept an adjournment , Honourable Senator Cools . 
the matter is standing in my name for a ruling . 
however , the Senate agreed today to hear further representations . 
if , when the matter comes up again , the Senate agrees to hear further representation , then it will be proper to hear other senators . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I draw your attention to some distinguished visitors in the gallery . 
his Excellency Eduardo Ferrero Costa , Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Peru is accompanied by the ambassador from Peru , the Honourable Mr. Couturier . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 50 
Thursday , March 26 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
prevention of Childhood Injuries 
Mr. John MacPhee 
winner of YTV Achievement Award for Piping 
Quebec 
reduction in English - Language Health Care Services 
bluenose 
seventy - Seventh Anniversary of Launch in Lunenburg , Nova Scotia 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Senate 
tribute to Departing Page 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
interim Report of National Finance Committee on Main Estimates Presented 
adjournment 
question PERIOD 
fisheries and Oceans 
collapse of Atlantic Fishery - Accountability of Senior Departmental Officials - Government Position 
canada - United States Relations 
harassment by U.S. Customs and Immigration Officers of Canadian Travellers Seeking Entry - Government Position 
fisheries and Oceans 
decline of Stocks on West Coast - Possible Closure of Fishery with Corresponding Assistance for Fishers - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
unrest in Cities in North Korea - Ramifications for Treaty Obligations with South Korea - Government Position 
solicitor General 
shooting by RCMP Officers of Mother and Son on Tsuu T ' ina Nation Reserve , Alberta - Establishment of Independent Inquiry - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
third Reading 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Adjourned 
motion in Amendment 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
interim Report of National Finance Committee on Main Estimates Adopted 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned Awaiting Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order - Order Stands 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
seventeenth Report of Committee Adopted 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
sixteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee 
international Summit of Sexually Exploited Children and Youth 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Thursday , March 26 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
prevention of Childhood Injuries 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise today to draw your attention to the release of For the Safety of Canadian Children and Youth : 
in one document , it brings together relevant data from various Canadian sources on childhood fatalities , hospitalizations and emergency room visits due to injury and poisoning . 
honourable senators , the death and hospitalization rates for most types of injuries among children and youth under the age of 20 are declining , but injuries are still the leading cause of death , and account for about 17 per cent of all children who are hospitalized . 
many injuries are still occurring in seemingly safe situations . 
for example , more than one in five injuries among those under the age of 20 occurred in and around the home . 
most of the chapters in the book are written by experts in the field and deal with certain types of injury . 
the authors present and analyze the data on childhood injuries . 
in my view , the most important aspect of this book is that it raises awareness on the cause of childhood injuries by identifying risks and recommending steps that can be taken to prevent injury . 
although most of us are at the age when we are having grandchildren rather than children , it is a good book for us to read in order to protect our grandchildren . 
Mr. John MacPhee 
winner of YTV Achievement Award for Piping 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I wish to bring to the attention of this chamber the proud achievement of a young piper from Prince Edward Island who was among 16 Canadian youths chosen for the Ninth Annual YTV Achievement Awards . 
a grade 12 student , this YTV achiever excels in classical highland bagpipe music . 
as well , he plays the Scottish lowland small pipes , the alto and baritone saxophone , the tin whistle and the piano , all while keeping up his school work and other extracurricular activities . 
honourable senators , I am proud to tell you that this young Islander attends the College of Piping and Celtic Performing Arts in Summerside , Prince Edward Island , run by director Scott MacAulay . 
the College of Piping has positioned itself as the leading international institute in the world for the study of the great highland bagpipe and other Celtic performing arts. 
currently , students come to the College of Piping from all over the world . 
each year they arrive from New Zealand , Hong Kong , Singapore , Germany , the United States and , yes , even Scotland . 
indeed , the college has built such a solid reputation that the children of former world champions from Scotland are coming to Summerside to perfect their craft . 
honourable senators , I hope that you will join with me in congratulating John MacPhee on his award , as well as Scott MacAulay on the success of the College of Piping . 
Quebec 
reduction in English - Language Health Care Services 
hon. Dalia Wood : 
honourable senators , English - language health care in Quebec is in peril again . 
when last I spoke to you on the subject , the Government of Quebec had not yet approved English - language health care access plans that had been formulated by the regional health boards , stating that it was concerned with the level of English - language services being recommended . 
abundant were the claims that institutional bilingualism was becoming rampant in Quebec hospitals , and that the ability of Quebecers to work in French would be seriously compromised by the access plans . 
allow me to remind you that , once adopted , the services indicated in your program become a right for English - language users . 
it is no wonder that some boards were feeling pressure to reduce services , even if the minister is on record as stating that that was not the Quebec government ' s intention . 
yesterday ' s Montreal Gazette informs us that English - speaking people in the Saint Maurice region could see a reduction in English - language services - by as much as half . 
because of the above letter , many of the institutions are unwilling to guarantee services in English . 
today ' s Gazette informs us that the Mauricie - Bois - Franc regional health board voted unanimously not to require any institutions to provide services in English . 
English - speaking Quebecers in that region will have to rely on the good will of individual employees to provide the services they are entitled to by law . 
English - speaking Quebecers in the Saint - Maurice region will now be forced to travel approximately 142 kilometres to Montreal if they want to be guaranteed services in their own language . 
all of this because , in the Quebec government ' s eyes , the right of people to work in French takes precedence over the rights of English - speaking Quebecers to receive health care in their own language . 
this is completely unacceptable . 
i urge honourable senators to support the English - speaking minority in its quest to receive health care that they can understand , and with which they can feel comfortable . 
a hospital is not an appropriate political background . 
people ' s lives are at stake . 
bluenose 
seventy - Seventh Anniversary of Launch in Lunenburg , Nova Scotia 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore : 
honourable senators , I rise to make a statement with respect to a very important event that happened 77 years ago today . 
she went on to become a highliner fisherman and sailed into our hearts and Canadian heritage forever as the undefeated " Queen of the North Atlantic , " being victorious in every series of races in which she represented Canada against the United States of America for the coveted International Fishermen ' s Trophy . 
her legendary skipper was Captain Angus Walters of Lunenburg . 
i wish to pay tribute to Captain Walters and all of the men who sailed with him on Bluenose . 
those men , the ship and her designer represented excellence in ship design , shipbuilding and seamanship , whether as fishermen or racers . 
had these men not done what they did , there would be no Bluenose legend , and there certainly would not be a Bluenose II. 
i , therefore , wish to make special mention of the surviving crew members of the original Bluenose : 
don Bailly , Captain Perry Conrad , Robert Cook , Paul Crouse , Robert Crouse , Captain Ellswork Greek , Clement Hiltz , Captain Matthew Mitchell , Merrill Tanner and Paul Wentzell , all of Lunenburg ; Harold Rafuse of Bridgewater ; Clyde Eisnor of Mahone Bay , John Carter of Halifax , and Captain Claude Darrach of Herring Cove . 
these Nova Scotians were champions all . 
it is also worthy of mention on this day that during the approaching summer , Canada Post Corporation will issue a stamp in recognition of William J . Rou é and his design genius . 
in closing , as you are aware , the Government of Canada announced last week various projects planned to celebrate the millennium . 
one of these projects is Tall Ships 2000 , which will be the nautical event in Canada for that year and will see over 100 of the tall ships of the world gather in Halifax - always a hospitable liberty port . 
i commend that historic event to you and suggest that you begin making your vacation plans now . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of a group of teachers from the United States who are on a field trip to Ottawa . 
the teachers are accompanied by Mr. John Preston of the Canadian Studies Program and Dr. William Metcalfe of the University of Vermont . 
welcome to the Canadian Senate . 
honourable senators will recall that this group visits us at least once a year . 
the host this year is the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme , who has followed in the footsteps of a former senator who hosted this group each year . 
i am delighted that he is in the gallery as well ; our past colleague Senator Heath Macquarrie . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Senate 
tribute to Departing Page 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , on another item of interest to the Senate , one of our pages , Terrence Schmaltz , who is from British Columbia , will be leaving us today . 
this is his last day in the Senate , at least as a page . 
he has secured employment with a senator . 
Terrence has sent me a letter , from which I will read a small portion : 
finally , I would like to thank all of the Senators and Staff of the Senate for all of their patience and kindness during my time as a Senate Page . 
Terrence was with us for two years . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , presented the following report : 
Thursday , March 26 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
tenth REPORT 
your committee , to which was referred the Bill C - 21 , An Act to amend the Small Business Loans Acts , has examined the said bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
interim Report of National Finance Committee on Main Estimates Presented 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the fourth report , being an interim report , of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance concerning the examination of the Main Estimates laid before Parliament for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 . 
i ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day , and that it form part of the permanent record of this house . 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate , appendix , p . 555 . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( g ) , I move that this report be taken into consideration later this day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration later this day . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today it do stand adjourned until Tuesday next , March 31 , 1998 , at 2:00 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
question PERIOD 
fisheries and Oceans 
collapse of Atlantic Fishery - Accountability of Senior Departmental Officials - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries recommends that senior management of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans be transferred out of the department for their role in the collapse of the East Coast fisheries . 
only the Liberal members of the committee did not agree with this recommendation . 
does the Leader of the Government in the Senate agree with these Liberal members or does he support the recommendation of the committee that senior managers be transferred out of the department and held accountable for their actions ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it would be inappropriate for me to comment on the transfer of any public servants . 
the report of the Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans will provide the federal government with a useful tool in responding to the many issues facing the Atlantic fishery . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
the Liberal members of the committee recommended that the minister demonstrate his will to restore trust between the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and the fishing community . 
they oppose the transfer of the bureaucrats . 
this means that the bureaucrats will not be held accountable for the collapse of the fisheries . 
is protecting the careers of a few bureaucrats more important than obtaining justice for the people of Atlantic Canada , who have had their careers ruined by the faulty decisions of the bureaucrats ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , my honourable friend would know that the standing orders of the House of Commons require the government to provide a comprehensive response to the committee ' s report , and I suggest that we await the government ' s response . 
canada - United States Relations 
harassment by U.S. Customs and Immigration Officers of Canadian Travellers Seeking Entry - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
recent reports in the media have revealed a distressing problem . 
according to a number of complainants , United States pre - clearance customs officers are acting in an aggressive and bullying manner towards Canadian travellers . 
pre - clearance points are an important aspect of travel to the United States , since many American airports do not have customs and immigration facilities . 
nevertheless , it is unacceptable for Canadian travellers to be harassed and intimidated by U.S. customs officers with denial of entry , strip search , confiscation of travel documents and personal effects , and detention without a bone fide reason . 
it is also unacceptable that travellers must suffer mistreatment on their own home soil without any clear , official recourse . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would agree with my honourable friend that such behaviour is unacceptable . 
fisheries and Oceans 
decline of Stocks on West Coast - Possible Closure of Fishery with Corresponding Assistance for Fishers - Government Position 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I , too , have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate with regard to fisheries . 
in view of the recent announcement that , due to the failure of stocks to return , the salmon fishery on the West Coast has been virtually annihilated , has the minister any information as to what corrective action the department will take ? 
after the fact , I would hate to think that those of us from the West Coast did not stand up and ask the government , and those others who are making the decisions , to shut down the fishery on the West Coast totally , if it were necessary , in order to save the various species that are in extreme danger of extinction . 
it is the coho and various other species that are being depleted . 
their very existence is being threatened at this time . 
does the minister have any information on that situation ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is a serious problem on both coasts in Canada . 
as my honourable friend suggests , it is quite obvious that 1998 will be a difficult salmon season on the West Coast . 
this is as a result of poor marine survival , changing ocean conditions , and the continued downward trend in coho production in British Columbia . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question for the minister . 
will there be assistance for the Pacific fishery in the event that there is a shut - down ? 
will a similar package to that which was extended to the East Coast be offered to the fishermen on the Pacific Coast ? 
will the minister bring my concerns to the minister and to cabinet , in order to ensure that some of us will be prepared to examine the possibility of an entire shut - down for the sake of the fishery itself , in the long term ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , with respect to the possible shut - down of the fishery , the Minister of Fisheries , Mr. Anderson , is closely monitoring the entire situation . 
with respect to the possibility of assistance , I am also aware that the Minister of Human Resources Development is working in close collaboration with the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans to determine what assistance might be given to fishers on both coasts of Canada because of the tragic situation that has developed . 
foreign Affairs 
unrest in Cities in North Korea - Ramifications for Treaty Obligations with South Korea - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I , too , have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in recent weeks there has been a growing number of reports of fighting between the police and military units in the capital of North Korea . 
in the view of some , this could be a prelude to some type of mutinous revolt or uprising . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate to us whether the government has taken note of this situation , and perhaps tell us what the present state of affairs is in North Korea ? 
i ask that question because , as you will appreciate , I have a supplementary question with respect to contingency plans that Canada may or may not have . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
if there is any new information I can bring to my honourable friend , I will be happy to do so at the first opportunity . 
senator Forrestall : 
bearing in mind , honourable senators , that one of the scenarios - perhaps the principle scenario - for North Korea involves a military attack on South Korea ; that South Korea is a major trading partner with Canada and that the situation is grave on the peninsula , what are our treaty obligations to South Korea in the event of this type of conflict , given the other arrangements that are in place with respect to North Korea and South Korea ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of the specific treaty obligations , but I will be happy to bring in a complete answer for my honourable friend at the first opportunity . 
solicitor General 
shooting by RCMP Officers of Mother and Son on Tsuu T ' ina Nation Reserve , Alberta - Establishment of Independent Inquiry - Government Position 
hon. Willie Adams : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate about the incident which occurred just outside of Calgary at an Indian reserve . 
according to my information , and that given on the news , it was said that the aboriginal people would like to have an independent inquiry . 
i hope the government will support an independent inquiry regarding what happened at this reserve . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for his question . 
i am sure that all honourable senators join with me in expressing our shock and sympathy : our shock at the developments , and our sympathy to the families concerned . 
i know that a full investigation is being conducted at the present time by the authorities in the province . 
as to whether or not an independent inquiry will be instituted , I will be happy to bring my honourable friend ' s comments to the attention of my colleagues in order to determine whether such an inquiry would be a federal or a provincial responsibility . 
orders OF THE DAY 
Mackenzie Valley Resource Management Bill 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Forest , seconded by the Honourable Senator Fitzpatrick , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to provide for an integrated system of land and water management in the Mackenzie Valley , to establish certain boards for that purpose and to make consequential amendments to other Acts . 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I rise today to join in the second reading debate on Bill C - 6 , the Mackenzie Valley resource management bill . 
at second reading , we discuss the principle or the general thrust of the bill . 
when a bill has successfully passed second reading , we have approved the bill in principle . 
bill C - 6 has a long history . 
it arises out of the settlement of two comprehensive land claim agreements in the Northwest Territories . 
on April 22 , 1992 , the former Progressive Conservative government signed a comprehensive land claims agreement with the Gwich ' in people . 
in September of 1993 , it concluded a similar agreement with the Dene and M é tis of the Sahtu region . 
the bill before us is similar to a bill that was introduced by the previous government and died on the Order Paper with the call of the June 1997 general election . They 
implement certain covenants in these agreements . 
before I proceed any further with my remarks today , I wish to make it clear to honourable senators and to all of the groups that the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples will hear on this bill that I support wholeheartedly aboriginal self - government . 
growing up , as I did , outside of Winnipeg and having made the contacts I have made in my career in the aboriginal community , I believe I can say that I understand , perhaps as well as anyone , most of the frustrations and aspirations of Canada ' s aboriginal community . 
bill C - 6 creates four new administrative tribunals to manage water , resource and land use planning in the Mackenzie Valley . 
first , we have the Land Use Planning Board which will be established in each of the Gwich ' in and the Sahtu settlement areas . 
next , we have the Mackenzie Valley Land and Water Board , which will have the jurisdiction to issue land permits and water licences for developmental activities in the Mackenzie Valley . 
it may have up to 17 members , including two permanent regional panels , one in each district , consisting of five members each . 
here there is a minimum seven appointments by the government , either federal or territorial . 
finally , the Environmental Impact Review Board will have a minimum of seven members , of which at least half will be government appointees . 
this board will have the power to make recommendations to the government to accept , reject , or modify development proposals . 
honourable senators , from my reading of the bill , the appointees are responsible or accountable basically to no one . 
this is reminiscent of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board which is presently being scrutinized by the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
the possibility of patronage appointments looms large in relation to the Pension Plan Investment Board , and I would suggest it looms even larger in relation to the boards to be established by Bill C - 6 . 
i do understand the need to protect the environment and the ecosystems in Canada ' s north from disruptive and unplanned development , but surely it is not necessary to establish all of these boards with the attendant bureaucracies that will be attached to them at a time when both government and industry are trying to streamline their processes . 
surely one board dealing with the planning and development of the Mackenzie Valley area would suffice , one board that might even have one or two representatives of industry on it . 
surely that would be more efficient from a timing and decision - making perspective and for consistency . 
a single board doing the work of these three , four or five boards could have criteria set for its members , criteria that are relevant to the tasks before the development board . 
perhaps its membership could be composed of representatives of industry , aboriginal peoples , the government of the Northwest Territories , and the federal government . 
with one board , there would be one supporting bureaucracy . 
however , what we have before us is an administrative maze which involves duplication of applications and procedures . 
honourable senators , I have another concern with this bill dealing with its territorial jurisdiction , and this concern is much more important . 
the purpose of the bill is to implement certain clauses in the Gwich ' in Comprehensive Land Claim Agreement . 
two aboriginal groups in this area have settled their land claims . 
i am referring , honourable senators , to the territories where there has been no settlement to date . 
in fact , it was this extra - territorial application of the bill which was raised most often in the objections presented before the House of Commons Aboriginal Affairs committee . 
the Deh Cho First Nations , whose territory lies to the south of the Sahtu , stated : 
... we are concerned that the state is trying to do an end run and pass this legislation affecting our territory without having an agreement with our peoples ... 
we must state for your record that we have never given our consent - implied or actual - to the legislation . 
we are not giving our consent to this process . 
the problem is that the Mackenzie Valley Land and Water Board , as well as the Environment Impact Review Board , cover the entire Mackenzie Valley . 
this includes not only the land of the Deh Cho people but the Dogrib people , the Treaty 8 Nations , and the Inuvialuit people . 
the strongest opposition to having their territory included within the jurisdiction of this bill comes from the Akaitcho peoples , Dene whose territory covers over 100,000 square miles . 
these Dene people have not surrendered their claims to the land , nor do they intend to . 
in fact , they have been trying to enter into a coexisting agreement with the Government of Canada and have not been able to do so to date . 
all of us in this place recognize the special relationship of the aboriginal peoples to their land . 
it is a gift or trust from the Creator . 
it is a relationship which is not to be disturbed lightly , but here we have a bill which effectively controls planning and development over lands which are not subject to any land claims agreement . 
for those of us who have travelled and worked with the people in this region , I cannot emphasize enough the importance of the land to these aboriginal peoples . 
the answer that is thrown out by the government is that the bill contains a non - derogation clause . 
yes , it does . 
clause 5 ( 2 ) states that nothing in this bill takes away from the protection provided in the Constitution for existing aboriginal rights . 
there are two problems with this clause : 
there must be a simpler and less confrontational way to deal with the implementation of the two land claims agreements in question here . 
i believe we should find a way which does not threaten the aboriginal rights of those who have not signed land claims agreements . 
that , to me , is the most important aspect that will and should be addressed at committee hearings on this particular legislation . 
honourable senators , surely we can look at one development board for the Mackenzie Valley in a bill that does not affect territory other than that which is subject to concluded land claims agreements . 
i believe that the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples should take the time that is necessary to thoroughly review the bill and deal with these concerns as effectively and quickly as possible . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I must inform the Senate that if the Honourable Senator Forest speaks now , her speech will have the effect of closing debate on the second reading of this bill . 
hon. Jean B . Forest : 
honourable senators , I should like to thank Senator St. Germain for the comments he has made . 
the concerns he has brought to the Senate have been voiced already to the committee set up by the House of Commons . 
we have certainly looked into those concerns , and I can assure the honourable senator that they will undergo another review at committee stage in this place . 
the reason for the two large , valley - wide boards is that one is looking after environmental impact and the other is looking after land and water use . 
in other words , there is a function for both of them . 
i would also remind senators that the peoples whose land claims have not been settled have a right to representation on the board . 
in fact , there is a clause in the bill indicating that when their land claims are settled , adjustments to the bill may be made to accommodate such settlements . 
honourable senators , we are looking into all of those concerns . 
however , I thank the senator for bringing them to the attention of the chamber , and I am sure that they will receive a full airing in the committee hearings . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Forest , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
canada Marine Bill 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator De Ban é , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lucier , for the second reading of Bill C - 9 , for making the system of Canadian ports competitive , efficient and commercially oriented , providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports , for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence . 
hon. W . David Angus : 
honourable senators , I rise to add my several comments to those made earlier this week by Senators Forrestall and Bryden respecting Bill C - 9 . 
i should like to read through the formal title of this bill , because it says a lot and it is significant : 
this is : 
an Act for making the system of Canadian ports competitive , efficient and commercially oriented , providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports , for the commercialization - 
- whatever that means - 
- of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence . 
this bill is a successor to Bill C - 44 which , to the widely expressed shock and outrage of Canada ' s maritime community , was unceremoniously left to die on the Order Paper here in the Senate when Parliament was prorogued on April 27 , 1997 , as the government raced - prematurely , and in such an unseemly manner - towards an election before responsibly completing important pending government business . 
an Hon. Senator : 
shame ! 
senator Angus : 
this crass example of political expediency , along with the ham - handed and inept management of the legislative agenda by the last Liberal government , combined to keep a key sector of Canada ' s maritime transportation community , including those using , operating and relying upon Canada ' s ports , its pilotage system and the St. Lawrence Seaway system , in a legal limbo after they had been geared up and literally stampeded by the government and its bureaucracy to be ready for implementation of the new legislation by spring of 1997 . 
such a let - down of Canadian taxpayers by the legislative system , by this Parliament , certainly does not enhance the image of the government or any of us as legislators . 
confusion , unnecessary and substantial expense and instability are the clear and continuing consequences for those affected . 
bill C - 9 essentially contains the enabling legislation needed to give effect to the long - awaited and overdue - and might I say generally welcome - National Marine Policy . 
some of you might have been here five years ago when I made my first remarks in this chamber . 
at that time , I called for a national marine policy for this nation . 
that policy was announced by Transport Minister Doug Young , midst great fanfare , in December of 1995 . 
as the formal title of the bill suggests , the basic elements of this policy involve the commercialization - Doug Young ' s half - baked word - or privatization , and the introduction of cost - savings processes and operating efficiencies to three of the key systems in our nation ' s complex maritime network . 
they are the port system , the St. Lawrence Seaway system and the pilotage system . 
the idea , as I understand it , is to create some 15 independently managed port authorities , known as CPAs , and to sell off or close various redundant , costly and / or otherwise no longer useful harbours and ports . 
apart from involving profound restructuring of the ports network and the ports feeder system , for all of which I understand substantial preparations and preliminary implementation have already been carried out , this legislation will result in major manpower shifts , job losses , plus totally new corporate structures . 
as to the seaway , Bill C - 9 would clear the way for the privatization of its administration , management and operations , but not of its ownership or of its ongoing major capital costs , which would remain the responsibility of government . 
when it was opened in 1959 , it was heralded as one of the great engineering accomplishments of all time , rivalling the Panama and the Suez Canals . 
it was certainly a fine example of the international goodwill and cooperation which we enjoy with our neighbour to the south . 
i am not opposed in principle to privatization or commercialization of the Canadian portion of the St. Lawrence Seaway . 
however , my instinct tells me that this action should be taken in cooperation with our American partners if it is to be successful and bear fruit . 
the St. Lawrence Seaway has been much in the news of late . 
there are indications that our government has revised its policy respecting the seaway since this legislation was first drafted two ministers of transport ago . 
it is no longer clear that privatization of the waterway is the right thing to do at this time or that that procedure would have the support of the government . 
it is reported in such respected publications as The Wall Street Journal and other leading media in the marine sector that the United States objects to privatization of the Canadian section of the seaway . 
i believe joint talks are being held to address the concerns of the United States and that a working group has been set up to review Canadian and American cooperation respecting the seaway and the Great Lakes system . 
we ought to know what the current status is before Bill C - 9 is enacted . 
i agree with Senator Forrestall and Senator Bryden that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications should take a close look at this matter . 
the pilotage system , although overhauled radically with other changes several decades ago , has become a thorny problem and excessively costly both to government and to the shipping industry , especially in the St. Lawrence River and in the Laurentian region . 
urgently needed constructive and welcome changes are contained in the proposed legislation . 
continued delay in implementation is of particular frustration to those operators who must continue to carry on business for a further shipping season . 
another shipping season opened today under the current unwieldy system . 
most aspects of Bill C - 9 , formerly Bill C - 44 , are generally popular with , acceptable to and long awaited by the affected sectors of Canada ' s maritime community . 
in a general way , they tend to represent modernization , progress and streamlining of archaic and no longer appropriate laws and regulations affecting and impeding state of the art functioning of Canada ' s important domestic and international marine industry . 
honourable senators , there are two problems with this proposed legislation . 
on the one hand , it is imperfect , unbalanced and flawed technically in several of its key respects , as was so well pointed out by Senators Forrestall and Bryden in Tuesday ' s debate in this chamber . 
as well , certain policy aspects of the bill , particularly as regards the seaway , may already be outdated and rendered obsolete due to changed policy and other circumstances and attitudes being expressed publicly by our American partners in the seaway . 
second , the legislation comes into this chamber for a second time , a full two and one - half years after the " new " National Marine Policy was announced by Doug Young . 
on April 25 , 1997 , Bill C - 44 was reported to the Senate by the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , two days before the election was called . 
but that is water under the bridge - or through the seaway ! 
the problem today is that we are faced with a new dilemma . 
do we aggravate the impatience and frustration of Canadian consumers and those affected in marine and related industries by delaying the bill further for an in - depth study , including hearings and consultations which could and should have taken place before this legislation was drafted ? 
i understand that at this late stage the vast majority of those affected would like the bill passed even with its flaws and imperfections . 
this is indeed a sad commentary . 
some of its provisions are controversial , and there continue to be protests from neighbouring communities , regional ports and other groups which claim they will suffer negative economic impact and consequences if Bill C - 9 passes as it stands . 
our dilemma is , do we subject Canadians to relatively short - term pain for ultimately long - term gain in the form of a better , fairer and more balanced piece of legislation or do we rush the bill through ? 
perhaps there is an alternative measure . 
honourable senators , my intent today is to make it absolutely clear to you that this legislation is urgently needed and awaited by a significant number of Canadians . 
at the same time , I believe this factor should not deter us from doing our duty in conducting a proper and critical study of the bill , including the holding of hearings , if necessary , and the proposal of amendments if deemed necessary , constructive and / or appropriate . 
therefore , I recommend that Bill C - 9 be referred immediately to the Standing Senate Committee on Transportation and Communications with a request that it be given preferred or fast - track attention . 
i hope that a careful and full study can be carried out and completed during April and May so that the bill can be reported back to this chamber and dealt with definitively before Parliament ' s summer recess . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read a third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1997 - 98 
third Reading 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Marie - P . 
Poulin moved the third reading of Bill C - 17 , to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act . 
bill C - 17 will modernize Canada ' s legislative and regulatory framework to meet the new realities of a more liberalized global telecommunications marketplace . 
honourable senators , this legislation has gone through close scrutiny by the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
the Senate committee found strong support for this well - crafted , technical bill from the industry . 
honourable senators , Canada ' s advanced telecommunications know - how shows that we are at the forefront of technology . 
we are in the vanguard of liberalizing open competition . 
this bill will allow us to capitalize on our technological knowledge and seek out new markets . 
i respectfully ask you to endorse this important legislation . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , during my comments in this chamber on second reading of Bill C - 17 , I made my apprehensions known concerning the proposed licensing regime of international telecommunications service providers . 
specifically , this proposal is found in clauses 1 , 3 , and 7 of the bill , wherein the government purports it is necessary to guard against potential anti - competitive conduct on the part of foreign monopolies in concert with their Canadian reseller affiliates . 
the alleged violators would be the telephone monopolies of countries that are not signatories to the Agreement on Basic Telecommunications , a codicil to the General Agreement on the Trade in Services , GATS . 
at that time , I claimed that the licensing of service providers amounts to excessive and redundant regulation that is best characterized as a solution looking for a problem . 
indeed , there is absolutely no public policy justification for such a licensing regime to be administered by the Canadian Radio - television and Telecommunications Commission , the CRTC . 
despite these misgivings , I was hoping that the detailed scrutiny possible at the committee stage would shed more light on Industry Canada ' s and the CRTC ' s motivations behind the bill . 
i was also hoping that , through frank discussions with government and industry stakeholders , their unique and expert views and perspectives would allay most of my concerns . 
unfortunately , I am sad to report to you that , in terms of the latter , this was not the case . 
my original conclusions remain robust . 
on the whole , the explanations provided by Industry Canada , the CRTC and industry officials at committee hearings were wholly unsatisfactory . 
for example , when questioning officials of Industry Canada and the Stentor association on the CRTC ' s ability to exercise direct control over facilities owners , and indirect control over resellers , on matters relating to certain anti - competitive conduct under the existing regulatory regime , the answer was an unequivocal " yes . " 
both parties , however , qualified their answers in light of a recent case involving Hong Kong Tel ' s offering preferential call - termination rates to its reseller affiliate over that of its competitors . 
i dealt with the Hong Kong Tel case in some detail at second reading . 
industry Canada stated that " everyone felt it was a long , laborious and not terribly efficient process . " 
the Stentor association , for its part , stated that nder the present CRTC regime : 
- caught in the Hong Kong Tel situation ... as 
ham in the sandwich ... to 
get at resellers , we are the players who have to pull the plug on a nefarious reseller such as Hong Kong Tel , and that presents a major public relations problem for us . 
however , honourable senators , the Industry Department and Stentor overstate the relevance of the Hong Kong Tel case to the competition problem at hand . 
indeed , the Hong Kong Tel case was not about abusive , anti - competitive behaviour . 
this was a case of a Canadian affiliate of a foreign monopoly telco circumventing the CRTC ' s routing restrictions that prohibited Canadian telcos from engaging in the practice of switched hubbing their Canadian traffic over the switching facilities of their foreign affiliates before sending it off to their final destinations . 
it was , therefore , these routing restrictions , which are themselves anti - competitive in nature since they deny the efficient transport of signals , which created the problem . 
what is needed to resolve this problem is less regulation , not more as is proposed by Bill C - 17 . 
indeed , in December of last year , the CRTC saw fit to eliminate these routing restrictions so that there will no longer be any motivation for this type of case to reappear in the competitive international telecommunications environment made possible under the GATS . 
in any event , the protracted resolution of the Hong Kong Tel case was the result of the time - consuming discovery stage of the CRTC investigation involving the determination of two main questions : 
first , what exactly did Hong Kong Tel do ? 
second , how did it go about it ? 
what was interesting about Industry Canada ' s and the CRTC ' s testimony before the committee was that they neglected to inform us that this discovery stage is common in all regulatory regimes . 
in other words , upon receiving a complaint of anti - competitive behaviour , the CRTC will need to initiate this very same kind of discovery phase in its investigations under the licensing regime that the CRTC would administer , so Bill C - 17 will not speed up the regulatory process , and the licensing regime has no special advantage over the existing regulatory environment . 
let us look more closely at the impact of the CRTC ' s order that had BC Tel end the sublease of the Teleglobe international phone line to Hong Kong Tel , thereby putting an end to the rate savings Canadian consumers were getting from Hong Kong Tel ' s reseller . 
subsequently , Hong Kong Tel ' s customers were left to use either Teleglobe or some other reseller that leased Teleglobe ' s facilities as their service provider . 
it is therefore misleading to suggest that these consumers were upset over the matter of who provides international phone service and how the CRCT implements its cutting off of services of a rogue reseller . 
Alternately put , Canadians tasted the fruits of competition but were subsequently let down by their public servants , who forced them to return to the monopoly price era promoted by the CRTC ' s barrier - laden regulatory environment . 
clearly , the arguments of a protracted resolution period and the collateral damage inflicted on Canadian facilities owners under the existing CRTC regulation framework are red herrings . 
moving to the question of the applicability of the Competition Act in what is essentially a competition issue , the committee was told that the act would not apply as it would constitute an extraterritorial application . 
the answer to these questions was an unequivocal " yes , " but that there would be a jurisdictional issue in some circumstances . 
the Bureau of Competition confirmed that , where Canada did not have a bilateral cooperation agreement on antitrust enforcement with other countries , the Competition Act would be an ultra vires extraterritorial application . 
we now have all the components to the decision - making process that led Industry Canada to conclude that the existing CRTC regulatory regime and the Competition Act were both inadequate to the task of governing potential anti - competitive conduct by foreign telephone monopolies operating in Canada through an affiliated reseller . 
the Government of Canada is , therefore , seeking a new CRTC regulatory licensing regime for international telecommunications services providers . 
however , the calculus of the government ' s decision on the application of the appropriate public policy instrument is flawed , in my opinion , for two reasons . 
the first reason is that the Industry Department ' s cost - benefit analysis omits recognition of the disadvantages of a regulatory licensing regime which improperly weighs this criterion against the probability of predatory behaviour by foreign telco monopolies , which is very small , as history attests . 
indeed , the Government of Canada , in proposing such a regulatory licensing regime , would be boxing at shadows , as I suggested to one of the witnesses . 
clearly , Industry Canada officials failed to appreciate the extreme risks entailed in a predatory war and , consequently , the rarity of such reckless behaviour in the forthcoming competitive international telecommunications market . 
it has been more than 100 years since Canada adopted its first antitrust law , and over this past century there have been less than a handful of predatory pricing cases brought successfully to trial . 
this is not an accident . 
the second reason is that Industry Canada ' s conclusion in favour of an overlapping CRTC licensing regime is the result of a flawed methodology that is based on looking at either economic instrument in isolation of the other . 
when viewed independently , both the existing CRTC regulatory regime and the Competition Act can appear inadequate . 
here , there is almost universal agreement among industry stakeholders , but when viewed as complementary economic instruments rather than as alternatives , the existing regulatory and competition policy institutions , backed by their governing acts , are sufficient to the task at hand . 
indeed , considering the disadvantages of a licensing regime and given the possibility of cooperation between the CRTC and the Bureau of Competition , which should be more easily accomplished today with the reorganization of the bureau within Industry Canada , a more cohesive , effective and efficient governing framework will likely emerge . 
honourable senators , in terms of its disadvantages , licensing has been the tool of choice by many a cartel . 
it is under this restricted entry condition that monopoly clubs flourish . 
even now , as the CRTC is engaging in its licence rule - making proceedings , Teleglobe and others have requested the adoption of a detailed tariff reporting regime to be made public and subject to stakeholder comments . 
to some , this may seem benign , but to others , there is nothing surprising about this request that would facilitate price - fixing agreements within this market segment . 
finally , no matter how well - intentioned a licensing regime may be , it is always subject to subversion , as it can be used as a strategic business weapon to gain an advantage in the marketplace by making an allegation against an important rival that is unwarranted . 
canada would be far better off avoiding a licensing regime that would engender competitors from engaging in such privately rewarding but socially wasteful game - playing tactics . 
in conclusion , the Competition Act is the more appropriate public policy instrument in dealing with abusive , anti - competitive conduct with respect to foreign monopolies of countries where Canada has a bilateral , cooperative , antitrust enforcement agreement . 
for the monopolies of other countries , the current regulatory regime that would have the facilities - based carriers cut off service to the Canadian reseller affiliate of a foreign monopoly will suffice . 
that , honourable senators , is precisely what happened in the Hong Kong Tel case . 
this framework will provide for a smooth transition from a monopoly to a competitive environment . 
thus , the existing regulatory regime is the more efficient system , as was explained by the Stentor association in its testimony to the committee as follows : 
indeed , the original draft of the Telecommunications Act , as tabled in the House of Commons , envisaged the licensing regime . 
the direct power of the commission to make orders against telecommunications service providers is quick , cheap and efficient . 
it constitutes a delicate instrument for tailoring orders for the particular circumstances that pertain to a particular service provider . 
in this way , the tools and remedies afforded the Bureau of Competition as set out in the Competition Act , and the CRTC as currently set out in the Telecommunications Act , are all that is required to correct what is essentially a competition issue in the transition period from the monopoly to competition . 
as the Stentor association clearly acknowledged in the committee hearings : 
that is certainly part of the process that we accept . 
the question is over what period of time and under what rules ... 
honourable senators , Industry Canada , in its insistence on the new regulatory licensing regime , is merely " boxing at shadows . " 
the proposed regulatory licensing regime represents excessive and redundant regulation . 
motion in Amendment 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
therefore I move , honourable senators , that Bill C - 17 be amended by severing clauses 1 , 3 and 7 from the bill so that the remainder of Bill C - 17 can quickly proceed to Royal Assent . 
the amendments are as follows : 
that Bill C - 17 be amended 
( a ) on page 1 by deleting lines 4 to 10 ; and 
( b ) on pages 1 to 12 by renumbering clauses 2 to 24 as clauses 1 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
that Bill C - 17 be amended 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 18 and 19 ; and 
( b ) on page 2 , 
( i ) by deleting the heading preceding line 1 , and 
( ii ) by deleting lines 1 to 40 ; 
( c ) on page 3 , by deleting lines 1 to 15 ; and 
( d ) on pages 3 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 4 to 24 as clauses 3 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
that Bill C - 17 be amended , on page 4 , by replacing line 36 with the following : 
" person who provides basic telecommunications services to con - " . 
that Bill C - 17 be amended 
( a ) on page 5 by deleting lines 10 to 18 ; and 
( b ) on pages 5 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 8 to 24 as clauses 7 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
the Estimates , 1998 - 99 
interim Report of National Finance Committee on Main Estimates Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fourth report , an interim report , of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance concerning the examination of the Main Estimates laid before Parliament for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 . 
i wish to thank honourable senators opposite for granting unanimous consent for us to consider this report today . 
it is intended to assist the progress of Bill C - 34 and to grant the government interim supply . 
the committee shall continue its examination of the Main Estimates in the weeks to come , and shall report to the Senate . 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
second Reading 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to second reading of Bill C - 34 , for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1999 . When given Royal Assent , Bill C - 34 will be known as Appropriation Act No. 1 , 1998 - 1999 . 
it is also called the interim supply bill , and grants supply for the first quarter of this new fiscal year , that is , April , May , June , 1998 . 
our committee met on March 25 , 1998 , to study the Main Estimates . 
in so doing , our committee heard from Mr. Ovid Jackson , Parliamentary Secretary to the President of the Treasury Board . 
Mr. Jackson appeared with officials from the Treasury Board Secretariat . 
all of them answered questions from the senators on the committee . 
the committee adopted an interim report , which was adopted by the Senate a few moments ago . 
honourable senators , the government is making efforts to improve the quality of information that is provided to Parliament through the Estimates . 
honourable senators , there are four parts to the Main Estimates . 
they are Parts I , II , III and IV. 
part I , provides an overview of federal spending by summarizing the key elements of the Main Estimates . 
part II , which is traditionally referred to as the " Blue Book , " directly supports the Appropriation Act . 
it lists in detail the moneys that individual departments and agencies require for the upcoming fiscal year . 
it also identifies the spending authorities and the amounts to be included in subsequent appropriations . 
for this new fiscal year 1998 - 1999 , Part I and Part II are published in a single volume . 
part III is made up of 80 volumes which identify the individual expenditure plans for each of the departments and agencies of the federal government . 
these volumes will become available by the end of this month . 
part IV of the Main Estimates will become available in the fall and will describe the results that were achieved against the expectation contained in Part III. 
honourable senators , since 1993 , the government has exercised commendable discipline in controlling federal spending . 
in sum , federal government spending is headed back to where it was in the post - war era of the 1940 ' s . 
honourable senators , Minister Paul Martin ' s February 1998 budget provides for planned expenditures of $ 148 billion . 
of this total , $ 43.5 billion is for public debt charges , a reduction of $ 2.5 billion from last year ' s Estimates of $ 46 billion ; $ 104.5 billion is for program spending ; and $ 103 billion , or 71 per cent , is statutory expenditure . 
the three largest departmental expenditures are the Department of Finance at $ 62.8 billion , the Department of Human Resources Development at $ 25.3 billion , and the Department of National Defence at $ 9.4 billion . 
the government has ushered in a profound cultural change in the public service that will take a number of years , modernizing the comptrollership function . 
the focus of modern comptrollership will be on results , accountability and managing risk . 
over the past years , the government has shifted the role of the public service . 
at the same time , several new initiatives will support the dynamic , motivated , and flexible workforce that the public service is moving towards . 
the new Universal Classification System within the public service will give public servants greater mobility , and will reduce costs , and simplify pay and staffing systems . 
the Parliamentary Secretary to the Treasury Board also told us that collective bargaining is an important component in the government ' s fostering a positive labour relations environment . 
to that effect , he told us that the government has signed seven collective agreements to date . 
the government ' s total forecast expenditure for this ensuing year is less than what had been forecast last April for the year that is over on March 31 , 1998 . The government is again showing its commitment to control the public purse by reducing the costs of government for two consecutive years . 
such efforts need not only our favour and our support but also our commendation . 
again , I would like to thank Minister Paul Martin for his excellent fiscal management . 
honourable Senators , the new financial year begins in a few days . 
we have been under another time constraint , so in point of fact , we have had very little time in which to consider Bill C - 34 . 
the passage of Bill C - 34 , the interim supply bill , is necessary to the government ' s business . 
however , the Senate Committee on National Finance will continue to study and examine the Main Estimates over the coming weeks , and will report their findings to you . 
i thank all honourable senators on both sides of our committee for their support of this interim supply bill . 
honourable senators , I urge you to pass Bill C - 34 . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Adjourned Awaiting Speaker ' s Ruling - Point of Order - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
motion of the Senator Kenny , seconded by the Honourable Senator Nolin , for the second reading of Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsiblity Foundation . - ( 
speaker ' s Ruling ) . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , this matter is standing in my name for a ruling . 
yesterday I was asked if I was prepared to listen to further presentations , which I did , with the agreement of the Senate . 
honourable Senator Cools indicated that she wished to add her views , and I am prepared to hear the Honourable Senator Cools at this time , with the permission of the Senate . 
however , I should like to make my ruling next week , before we adjourn for two weeks . 
i am prepared to hear more representations , but at some point I must cut it off so that I can finalize my ruling . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
your Honour , I did not hear most of what you said but I understand that you are prepared to hear more submissions and discussion on Senator Kenny ' s bill ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
with the agreement of the Senate . 
senator Cools : 
do you mean this moment , or in the future ? 
i would love to speak to the issue , but I am unable to do so today . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i would like to make my ruling next week , which I think I should do in fairness to the Senate . 
the matter has been before me for a little while . 
next week we will adjourn for two weeks . 
i would be prepared to hear someone now , but no later than Tuesday , which would leave me Wednesday and Thursday to complete my ruling . 
senator Cools : 
your Honour , I thank you for your consideration , and for the opportunity . 
unfortunately , next week I am away travelling with the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access . 
i am quite sure senators would have agreed , but I could not speak next week . 
at the same time , I understand there is some urgency in giving your determination . 
i will reluctantly forfeit the opportunity to speak . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
then the matter stands in my name , and I hope I will be able to report Wednesday or Thursday of next week . 
order stands . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
bill S - 12 had been Bill S - 4 in the last Parliament , and , having passed second reading unanimously , was in committee for examination when Parliament was dissolved last April for the federal election . 
bill S - 12 will amend Canada ' s Criminal Code Part IV , Offences Against Administration of Law and Justice , to make it an offence for lawyers in judicial proceedings to : 
( a ) make public statements outside the tribunal that are known by counsel to be false or that counsel failed to take reasonable measures to ascertain were false ; 
( b ) institute or proceed with proceedings known by counsel to be brought primarily to intimidate or injure another person ; or 
( c ) knowingly to deceive or participate in deceiving the tribunal or to rely on false , deceptive , exaggerated or inflammatory documents . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 12 is my parliamentary response to a heart of darkness that has grown up in our midst recently and very swiftly . 
it is the mischief , deceit , and fraud perpetrated upon the courts as certain barristers deploy false allegations within judicial proceedings . 
the mischief is that certain barristers use false allegations as an instrument of injury to gain an advantage for their clients in a legal dispute while relying on their barristers ' privilege to shield them from any criminal or civil liability for their actions . 
a prevalent form of false allegations is the false accusation of child sexual abuse where one parent falsely alleges that the other parent has sexually abused the child . 
in one particular Ontario case , that of Anglican minister Reverend Dorian Baxter , Mr. Justice Somers referred to the use of false accusations as the weapon of choice in child custody proceedings . 
my Bill S - 12 was inspired by the questionable behaviour of certain barristers and the Law Society ' s hesitation to confront the problem . 
bill S - 12 is a response to the Supreme Court of Canada ' s judgement in Casey Hill v. Church of Scientology of Toronto . 
troubled by this case and Reverend Baxter ' s case , I studied the matter carefully , and , with this country ' s finest legislative drafter , developed my bill . 
i have spoken on these matters often in this chamber , including July 13 , 1995 on the Ontario Civil Justice Review Report and the Reverend Baxter case , and on November 23 , 1995 on the Hill v. Scientology decision , and on March 26 , 1996 , and October 28 , 1996 on Bill S - 4 itself . 
the fundamental issues in Bill S - 12 are the conduct of court proceedings and the bending of practice by certain barristers . 
parliament must uphold the principle which underpins the administration of justice , that is , truth itself . 
parliament must assert that the contrivance of deceit and fraud upon the courts is no part of the duty of any solicitor - barrister , and further , that lawyers owe a duty of truth and integrity to the courts . 
i refer senators to a timely 1997 article by lawyer Marvin Huberman in the Canadian Bar Review , Volume 76 , entitled " Integrity Testing for Lawyers : 
is It Time ? " 
he wrote : 
this is not to say that the problem is one of perception alone . 
there is a problem with professional behaviour amongst lawyers , and this may be linked to a basic integrity problem . 
a consideration of the Law Society ' s Discipline Digest shows the existing problems . 
he concluded : 
it is clear something has to be done to improve the image of lawyers . 
integrity testing might help . 
it could be used to identify which lawyers are deficient in that regard . 
across this land , there is the sentiment that there is something needing correction at the Bench and the Bar in the conduct of judicial proceedings and in certain lawyers ' practices . 
honourable senators , in speeches I have cited Mr. Justice Blair ' s 1995 Ontario Civil Justice Review Report on falsehood in family law proceedings and the crisis in the civil justice system in Ontario . 
i now add the 1996 Manitoba Civil Justice Review Task Force Report . 
appointed by then Manitoba Minister of Justice Rosemary Vodrey and chaired by Manitoba MLA David Newman , it included Manitoba Justices Guy Kroft , Gerald Mercier , and Jeffrey Oliphant . 
the Task Force heard horror stories about the traumatic impact on the accused person , on the immediate family and children affected by malicious false allegations designed to achieve sole custody , prohibit or restrict visiting privileges , and to punish the other parent . 
further : 
when false allegations are discovered , strong and effective sanctions are necessary to discourage such conduct . 
... lawyers , of course , must never assist in making false allegations and should be on guard against becoming the tool or dupe of an unscrupulous client . 
this phenomenon , the aggressive hurling of the weapon of choice during child custody proceedings , is well documented . 
this phenomenon is the devil ' s own work . 
for those terrorized by false allegations of child sexual abuse , for those accused of something so terrible and so repugnant to them as parents , it is soul destroying . False 
accusations are used by one parent to injure and damage emotionally in an effort to destroy the parent - child relationship of the other parent and even the other parent . 
this technique is employed mostly in civil proceedings , simply because the standard of proof in civil proceedings is lower than in criminal proceeding . 
it is the newly identified form of child abuse and child maltreatment . 
it is also the newest form of civil molestation and civil harassment , using the courts as instruments of injury and malice in civil litigation . 
today I cannot address the enormous financial burdens borne by our citizens personally and by the public treasury collectively , nor the emotional and psychological costs to citizens , particularly to children , but these are of enormous magnitude , as are the social consequences . 
in speeches , I have cited some case law and the judges . 
i have quoted the judges in the cases of Ontario ' s Reverend Baxter ' s B ( D ) and B ( R ) and B ( M ) v. Children ' s Aid Society of Durham Region and Marion Van den Boomen , 1994 ; British Columbia ' s Lin v. Lin , 1992 ; Manitoba ' s Plesh v. Plesh , 1992 ; Saskatchewan ' s Paterson v. Paterson , 1994 , and Ontario ' s Allen v. Grenier , 1996 . 
( 1540 ) 
i shall now continue with other cases of false accusations of child sexual abuse . 
in Pott v. Pott , a 1997 Manitoba Court of Queen ' s Bench case , Mr. Justice Jewers concluded : 
in all of the circumstances , there can be no finding - even to the lower civil standard - that the father ever sexually abused his daughter Cheryl . 
ominously , this is a multiple , recidivist , false accusations case . 
Mr. Justice Jewers said : 
the mother had a history of sexual abuse - or alleged sexual abuse - having at one time or another accused her father , brother and sister of sexually abusing her ... The 
city of Winnipeg Police had received a total of seven complaints from her alleging sexual abuse - involving some eleven persons - and only one was prosecuted - with an acquittal . 
further , Mr. Justice Jewers said : 
having regard to the mother ' s sexual history and the fact that the first disclosure was made in the context of ongoing domestic fights and quarrels between the mother and father , one cannot exclude the possibility that the mother influenced Cheryl , either directly or indirectly , to make the allegations that her father had been abusing her . 
honourable senators , I should explain that when I read a case name composed of letters , that is a method used to protect the children involved . 
i move now to the case of P . ( G . L . ) v. P . ( J . M. ) in the British Columbia Supreme Court . 
in his 1990 judgement , Justice Rowles stated : 
before the action was set for trial the mother had made allegations of sexual and physical abuse of the children by the father . 
the father here is G . L . P . and the mother is J . M. P . 
g . L . P . was given supervised access . 
two psychologists have observed the father with the children . 
Mr. Justice Rowles continued : 
from her evidence given during the review hearing regarding the access , it appeared to me that J . M. P is either obsessed with the belief that G . L . P . is abusing the boys or , alternatively , for whatever reason , she is determined that G . L . P not have access . 
her attitude and behaviour regarding G . L . P . ' s having access may pose a serious risk of emotional harm to the boys , particularly the older child . 
honourable senators , my next case is L . B . v. R . D . , a 1998 Ontario Court of Justice Provincial Division case in which Judge Patrick Dunn said : 
the children ' s aid society investigated both allegations and concluded that neither could be verified . 
judge Dunn continued : 
... l . B . obfuscated ; she misconstrued evidence and even tried to mislead the police ... I 
found L . B . ' s evidence to be entirely self - serving , manipulative and a condemnation of R . D . and his good parenting skills and person ... 
another serious event that strained L . B . ' s credibility was that she gave a false written statement dated 5 January 1995 ... The 
judge Dunn concluded : 
l . B . has taken the law into her own hands and has repeatedly denied access . 
by doing so , she deprived her child of a right that this child has to maintain contact with her father ... Her 
contempt for the court process and her neglect for the need of her child to see her father cries out for punishment . 
judge Patrick Dunn , in the face of 41 access denials and repeated court order violations , and for other reasons he stated in his judgement , sentenced the child ' s mother , Lisa Barbosa , to 60 days in jail for contempt of court . 
honourable senators , I move now to the case of Martha Metzner v. Dr. Louis Metzner , a 1993 British Columbia Supreme Court case of false allegations , not of child sexual , but of child physical abuse . 
Mr. Justice Preston stated : 
since she decided to leave her husband , Mrs. Metzner has inappropriately used her control over Kate and Jamie to gain her own ends in this litigation . 
this was most marked in the Kate incident when she concocted an allegation of physical abuse of Kate as a basis to have Dr. Metzner removed from the matrimonial home ... 
Mr. Justice Preston continued : 
Mrs. Metzner was interviewed by Sergeant Armstrong of the West Vancouver Police Department on January 8 , 1990 . 
the officer ' s notes indicate that she told him that there was no history of abuse and that Dr. Metzner had never hit her or the children . 
his notes also contain the entry , " Martha said lawyer told her that this would be enough to get him out of the house because he wouldn ' t leave . " 
in 1997 , at the British Columbia Court of Appeal , Mr. Justice McEachern cited Justice Preston , saying : 
" the judge said he was struck by the lengths she would go to demean the husband and that , in the judge ' s view , she is likely to continue to frustrate the children ' s access to their father and to undermine their relationship with him if it is in her power to do so . " 
the most obvious manifestation of this attitude on the part of the wife was the Kate incident mentioned by the trial judge when she persuaded Kate to make false , and later recanted allegations of physical abuse against her father to the police . 
honourable senators , the heart of the problem is the misuse of the privileges that are entrusted to lawyers as Officers of the Court . 
this privilege , both the absolute and the qualified , including solicitor - client privilege , shelters lawyers from criminal and civil liability for unsworn statements made within court documents and court proceedings . 
this privilege originates in Her Majesty ' s sovereign prerogative and is bestowed upon solicitor - barristers when they are admitted by Her Majesty as Officers of Her Court . 
these privileges are not wholly owned . 
officers of the Court hold these privileges in trust from Her Majesty . 
they are grants from the Sovereign to protect the Sovereign ' s public interest in justice . 
officers of the Court hold this privilege as part of the Sovereign ' s protection for the procedures of securing the truth and for securing justice itself . 
her Majesty ' s privilege cannot be enlisted to defeat truth or to defeat justice . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 12 imposes no new standard on barristers . 
bill S - 12 upholds and affirms the standard of the barristers ' code of ethics . 
the drafting language of Bill S - 12 borrows from the language of the Law Society of Upper Canada ' s rules of professional conduct . 
bill S - 12 simply elevates that same standard , an informal one , to law . 
bill S - 12 codifies these ethics and standards as law and places them into statute . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 12 has its origins in the Hill v. Church of Scientology case , which lasted eleven years and cost countless millions of dollars . 
in September 1984 , Scientology and its lawyers instituted contempt of court proceedings seeking to imprison Casey Hill , the Crown prosecutor associated with investigating the Church of Scientology . 
Casey Hill is now Mr. Justice Casey Hill . 
in November 1984 , Mr. Justice Cromarty ruled that Scientology ' s allegations against Casey Hill were untrue and unfounded . 
this terrible case is known for the inordinate financial cost , the longevity , and the mean - spiritedness of Scientology through its several lawyers and their unstoppable campaign to destroy Casey Hill . 
their persistent , reckless and unconscionable repetition of vicious and untrue accusations against Casey Hill , despite the judicial determination to the contrary , were shocking . 
Mr. Justices Griffiths , Catzman , and Galligan in their 1994 Ontario Court of Appeal decision revealed Scientology and its lawyers contumacious actions . 
they said regarding the Church of Scientology : 
it continued with unfounded contempt proceedings against Casey Hill when it knew , no later than September 27 , 1984 , that its principal allegation was untrue . 
it hid its knowledge of the falsity of that allegation from the court , from Casey Hill and from counsel whom it had retained to prosecute the contempt charges . 
that counsel is Mr. Manning . 
the justices continued : 
counsel for Scientology suggest that the unfounded charges of contempt of court against Casey Hill were laid as a result of the advice , albeit misguided , of Scientology ' s solicitors , and that therefore those charges could not constitute evidence of specific malice on the part of Scientology against Casey Hill . 
finally , the 1995 Supreme Court of Canada judgment upheld the Ontario Court of Appeal decision in Casey Hill ' s favour and awarded him the largest damages award in the libel history of Canada . 
about a nasty , threatening letter written by Scientology ' s counsel , Mr. Clayton Ruby , to Casey Hill , Mr. Justice Peter Cory said : 
it should be noted that at the time this letter was written , Clayton Ruby was a Bencher of the Law Society and Vice - Chairman of the Law Society ' s Discipline Committee . 
the letter implied that there could be disciplinary proceedings brought before the Law Society of Upper Canada and that a contempt action might be instituted . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 12 is a legislative response to a modern pathology . 
this psychopathy in the body politic of our courts needs our political and parliamentary study and action . 
while I do sincerely believe that lawyers and lawyers privileges must be upheld , that lawyers privileges must be maintained , and that the majority of lawyers are honest professionals , the minority who are abusing the process , namely , the deviants , need sanctions . 
i urge honourable senators to pass Bill S - 12 . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
seventeenth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the seventeenth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( Budget 1998 - 99 - Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access ) presented in the Senate on March 25 , 1998 . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move that the report be adopted now . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Rompkey , report adopted . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
sixteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixteenth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( Budget 1997 - 98 - Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access ) presented in the Senate on March 25 , 1998 . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move that the report be now adopted . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Rompkey , report adopted . 
the Senate 
concerns of Albertans - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Ghitter calling the attention of the Senate to the concerns expressed by Albertans with regard to the Senate as an institution : ( a ) its effectiveness , usefulness and viability ; ( b ) alternative means by which to select members of the Senate ; ( c ) the nature of its regional representation , particularly a desire to see equal numbers of Senators representing each province ; ( d ) the length of term of office ; ( e ) the role which a revised Senate might take at a national level ; and ( f ) the powers which would be appropriate for it to exercise in harmony with the House of Commons . - ( 
honourable Senator Di Nino ) . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I thank you for the privilege of allowing me to speak on this issue . 
i will probably go over my 15 minutes , so I hope you will grant me leave to continue . 
i rise to join our colleagues who have participated in the debate begun by Senator Ghitter . 
senator Gigant è s believes that Senator Ghitter failed to give serious consideration to this issue before bringing it to the attention of this chamber . 
to no one ' s surprise , I do not agree with him . 
senator Ghitter has put forth a thought - provoking analysis of the state of the Senate today . 
i do not agree with all that he says , but his inquiry should be applauded for starting some soul - searching by us , the occupants of the Red Chamber , which should lead to concrete , substantive recommendations for reform of this institution . 
the widespread criticism once again directed at the Senate - this time because of Senator Thompson ' s non - attendance - should not be taken lightly , even if the outrage and condemnation has been mostly without substance , and of the knee - jerk reaction type . 
Andrew Thompson has served as a lightning - rod for public discontent . 
he became a symbol of what many people consider , rightly or wrongly , to be the average senator . 
his reprehensible behaviour and irresponsible actions have earned this institution much disgrace . 
this is compounded by the fact , as Senator Murray mentioned in his remarks before the break , that we are all , in differing degrees , accomplices to Andrew Thompson ' s egregious behaviour . 
for too long we have seen nothing , said nothing and done nothing . 
we accepted his absence as part of the way things were done around here . 
this must change . 
honourable senators , it has long been my desire that the issue of Senate reform be discussed more fully by those most intimately concerned . 
since I arrived here in 1990 , we have touched on the subject from time to time , most notably in the run - up to the Charlottetown referendum . 
to my recollection , there has never been a full - scale debate . 
perhaps this inquiry will open the door to a long overdue airing of the subject . 
we , the institution of the Senate , are in trouble . 
we carry on oblivious to the rancor surrounding us , or hoping that it will somehow simply go away . 
obviously , this will not happen . 
i should like to make it clear that I do not consider myself an expert on Senate reform . 
i do not for a moment pretend to have all , or even any , of the answers nor , perhaps , will I add anything new to what has already been said . 
my desire today is more to provoke reflection and dialogue than to supply definitive answers . 
it is my hope that through this inquiry we will be able to have a constructive and meaningful discussion on the issue before us . 
i am equally hopeful that this discussion will be free from the extreme partisanship that robs parliamentary debate of so much of its value as an instrument for consensus and a force for change . 
partisanship is a necessary evil of parliamentary democracy , but it can be carried too far , and particularly so in the Senate . 
the Senate should get away from this way of doing business . 
there is far too much that we can accomplish without wasting our energies attacking one another for no reason other than , " That is the way things have always been done . " 
the record shows that not that many years ago , the Senate was much more a place of calm reflection , reasoned debate , and civil and courteous interaction . 
honourable senators , a number of years ago a former member of this place , Senator Eugene Forsey , gave a speech outlining some of his thoughts on Senate reform . 
Forsey argued that there were two types of reform : the impractical and the practicable . 
among the impracticable were ideas such as changing the number of senators , moving to an elected Senate - that is , one filled with provincial appointments - and renegotiating the Senate ' s power . 
Forsey called such ideas a waste of time . 
he said that they had just about as much chance of becoming law as they had of becoming the Archbishop of Canterbury . 
the reason for this was that each required amending the Constitution , and attempting that was simply not in the cards . 
Forsey felt it was better to make changes that did not require unleashing the constitutional bogeyman . 
i will not cite all of his proposals , but among them was setting a fixed term for Senate appointments . 
a second change proposed was to allow any senator reaching the age of 65 , and with 15 years of service , to retire on full pension , as judges are permitted to do . 
a third proposition was to oblige any senator who failed to attend at least one - third of the Senate sittings for two consecutive years to vacate his or her seat . 
other proposals included abolishing both the property qualification and the 24 separate senatorial divisions in Quebec ; giving the Senate the power to disallow subordinate legislation ; and establishing regional all - party caucuses . 
i cite these proposals because , in addition to being a clear and cogent expression of a former senator ' s thinking on the subject , they represent positions that can be studied and debated . 
it is my hope that all senators will commit their thoughts and ideas to paper and submit them for discussion , for I believe it is essential for our survival . 
it is in this vein that I decided to rise and offer my thoughts on this long - standing issue . 
while I do not pretend to have the same constitutional knowledge that many colleagues possess , I have given the subject of Senate reform a great deal of thought over the past few years . 
my thinking has led me to four general conclusions . 
honourable senators , Senate reform in any guise is difficult business . 
the Senate is an institution ; it has its own authority , traditions and prerogatives . 
the same is true of the House of Commons , the Supreme Court , the civil service and the provincial administrations . 
together , these institutions form a system of power relationships that make up the legal , political and constitutional framework of our country . 
within this system , everything and everyone has their place . 
attempts to change the status quo , to increase power here or to diminish it there , do not go unnoticed . 
they create reaction and opposition . 
in other words , change does not occur within a vacuum . 
the Meech Lake and Charlottetown accords are two classic examples of this . 
in the case of the Senate , would any Prime Minister willingly yield to the provinces the patronage tool of appointing senators ? 
would a Liberal Prime Minister agree to fill Senate seats with Conservatives ? 
would the House of Commons rush to pass legislation allowing or encouraging the Senate to use its awesome powers of disallowance more frequently ? 
would provincial premiers be happy to see elected senators usurping their role as spokesmen for the provinces in Ottawa ? 
any reform of the Senate - and by " reform " I mean fundamental changes and not simple tinkering - must take into consideration some critical questions . 
for example , how will the changes alter the powers and prerogatives of the people and institutions affected by reform ? 
will these people agree , will the institutions be able to adapt successfully ? 
these are important issues . 
honourable senators must also remember that change does not occur by itself . 
the key to successful change is building consensus . 
the second conclusion I have reached concerning Senate reform is that , despite all the rhetoric to the contrary , it remains my firm conviction that an appointed Senate is better than an elected one . 
an elected Senate would be little more than a second House of Commons , which in my opinion is not necessary . 
it is my belief that a parliamentary system of government with a majority representation in the house from any political party invariably gives too much power to the Prime Minister . 
it leads to a form of dictatorship . 
an elected Senate would only add to this power , particularly if the majority belonged to the same party as the Prime Minister and functioned under the usual rules of party discipline . 
ultimately , I feel that an elected Senate would add little value to the public policy process because elected senators would have the same political agenda as our colleagues in the House , would face the same pressures from special interests and would spend much of their time working on their re - elections . 
in cases where the Senate majority was in opposition to the party in government , as would likely be the case more often than not if elections were held at different times , then because of our parliamentary system of caucus solidarity and party discipline , I fear that Parliament would often be deadlocked . 
let us remember that political parties , regardless of their public pronouncements , exist to be elected and re - elected , first and foremost . 
the rewards of victory are enormous , and there is little value in losing . 
this is not to say that people seek public office for personal gain ; far from it . 
i am simply saying that the adversarial system leads to intense feelings of competition and rivalry as people and parties strive to win electors over to their point of view . 
as I stand here , I can almost hear the arguments forming around me to the effect that appointed representatives lack legitimacy . 
as senators , too often we tell ourselves that we lack legitimacy . 
it is an interesting point . 
it is easy to defend and difficult to refute . 
however , I am not sure how valid an argument it is among ordinary Canadians , those who are not members of the media and simply looking for something easy to be negative about . 
i also not referring to special interests being unhappy about something and using rhetoric as a means of gaining attention . 
both of these groups use the legitimacy argument as if it were some sort of great , self - evident truth . 
i see no self - evident link between appointment and lack of legitimacy . 
if the truth be known , it is not legitimacy we lack , but a good image . 
honourable senators , this chamber contains representatives from all parts of Canada and from all walks of life . 
we are not an elite , and though some of us are wealthier than the average Joe , the majority of us are not . 
we are average Canadians who happen to be senators . 
most of us work hard at our jobs . 
you and I know it , but the public does not . 
to the public at large , we have failed miserably and abysmally . 
in our silence , we have allowed others to define us . 
as a result , today our credibility and popularity are at an all - time low . 
in part , this is due to the widespread perception that the Senate is little more than a dustbin for party hacks . 
in part , it is a result of the constant denigration of the institution by ourselves for political gain , and I cite the examples of the free trade and GST debates . 
nothing could be further from the truth . 
nothing could be more harmful to the interests of this institution and the interests of Canadians . 
something must be done , and it must be done by us . 
we must define the problem , study the options and draw up a course of action . 
we cannot sit here and hope to gain acceptance in the eyes of Canadian people simply by wishing for it . 
we must do a better job of communicating with the public about ourselves , our accomplishments and our commitment to do the best possible job for Canadians . 
honourable senators , the third conclusion to which my thinking on Senate reform has led me is that an equal Senate is unacceptable to me as an Ontarian ; it is a non - starter . 
the idea that all provinces are equal is acceptable to me in a constitutional or theoretical sense . 
the amending formula , for example , says it takes seven provinces equalling 50 per cent of the population to ratify any change to the Constitution . 
in this sense , all provinces are equal . 
i can accept that . 
however , I cannot accept that representation in the Senate be based on equal numbers from each province . 
i can no more accept that the numbers of Ontario senators be equal to those of Prince Edward Island than could Quebecers accept that their province have the same number of representatives as Saskatchewan . It would not happen . 
i am in favour of a more equitable Senate , but I cannot support an equal one . 
my fourth general conclusion has to do with how Senate reform will happen . 
i believe firmly that any reform to this institution cannot , and will not , occur alone . 
to be truly successful , substantive Senate reform must be part of a larger effort at reforming our entire parliamentary system . 
the reason for this is that the Senate does not exist in a vacuum . 
changes to its role and powers will affect people and institutions elsewhere . 
success will only come through consensus and political will to change . 
do we move toward an American system of separation of powers ? 
do we draw a completely different system , one based on our own history and geography ? 
to paraphrase my colleague Senator Kinsella , whichever route we choose we will have to respect four guiding principles . 
the first is liberal democracy : 
any reform of the Senate must occur in accordance with the fundamental principles of our Constitution . 
the second principle is responsible government : 
reform cannot include powers that undermine the principle that the government of the day must be responsible to the representatives of the people in the House of Commons . 
the third principle is federalism : 
any reform must respect the rules and precedents that together constitute our federal system . 
the fourth principle is bicameralism : 
senate reform will need to take into consideration that our Parliament provides for two representations : national representation in the House of Commons and federal representation in the Senate . 
honourable senators , there are two other points I should like to touch upon before offering some specific ideas of my own on how we could reform the Senate . 
the first has to do with attendance . 
i raise this issue not because I have anything startling to add to the debate , but rather it is because I wish to offer an observation . 
we are all aware that Senate attendance does not the senator make , nor is it an accurate indication of the input or worth of a senator ' s contribution . 
they are criticized for their absence . 
in my mind , on most occasions this criticism is unjustified - not always , but most often - at least as far as my knowledge of my colleagues on both sides of this chamber is concerned . 
of course , there are those senators who are absent when travelling on Senate committees . 
they are doing their job but not doing it here in Ottawa , so they are counted as missing , as were 20 or so members who were absent from the vote on Andrew Thompson a couple of weeks ago . 
there are also members of this chamber who occasionally absent themselves for reasons other than strictly senatorial . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to advise that the honourable senator ' s 15 minutes are up . 
is leave granted for the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Di Nino : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
i appreciate your indulgence . 
this poses a more delicate problem , at least on first glance . 
when a senator attends a meeting or convention outside of Ottawa during the time the Senate is sitting , related to his or her particular line of work or chief interest , that senator is clearly not doing Senate business . 
strictly speaking , this is true . 
however , whether the senator deserves to be criticized depends largely upon one ' s point of view regarding what exactly they are doing , particularly if the absence is not directly related to personal benefit . 
no , they are not absent on Senate business , but if their presence results in jobs being created , investment opportunities being pursued , or in greater understanding and cooperation being achieved , should this not count , or is that opening the door too wide for abuse ? 
the point I am trying make here is that many of us play a variety of roles . 
we are senators , business people , human rights advocates , physicians , bankers , and educators . 
if one of us is asked to travel somewhere to speak because he or she is a senator and physician , should that senator decline for fear of criticism ? 
if a senator is asked to lead a delegation of business people or academics abroad to secure trade opportunities or academic links , should that senator refuse to go because the Senate records will list him or her as absent ? 
should such senators not , instead , weigh the good they can achieve elsewhere against what they can accomplish by sitting in this chamber ? 
should they not be trusted enough to make this decision ? 
should they not be believed and be taken at their word ? 
i hasten to add that I refer obviously to occasional and specific absences , and not to long - term and repeated non - attendance . 
i have a final comment to make on this issue . 
for all the criticism and snide comments I have heard from some members of the media and members of the other place about attendance in the Senate , I have yet to hear anyone stand up and call for attendance to be taken over there . 
perhaps this is an issue that the Leader of the Government in the Senate would care to raise with his cabinet colleagues . 
the second point I would like to make also concerns how we use our time as senators . 
bluntly put , we spend a lot of time doing political work . 
we work on behalf of our parties . 
like all members of Parliament , we spend a consider amount of time trying to improve our parties ' chances for re - election . 
some think such work is wrong . 
senator Tkachuk was criticized last fall for admitting that he disbursed a fair sum of money travelling as campaign co - chair during the election campaign , but I do not recall any of this criticism coming from members of the other place . 
interestingly , our colleague Senator Taylor was quoted as saying that while he occasionally mixed official political business with party affairs , he would never have had the courage to come right out and say so , as did Senator Tkachuk . 
the reason I raise this matter is not to disparage Senator Taylor ; far from it . 
i simply wish to highlight an issue for which we are sometimes criticized . 
we all do political work . 
it is part of our life and part of our job . 
we should not try to hide this . 
we should not try to deny it . 
we should be up - front about what we do . 
why not ? 
we are members of political parties , and these parties must be kept up . 
by not admitting that , in fact , we are doing either public or political work , we increase public cynicism . 
we open ourselves to criticism where none is justified . 
however , so long as we are honest , so long as the rules are clear and we respect them , I think Canadians will accept and understand this . 
honourable senators , I should now like to give you some suggestions on how I would reform the Senate . 
we would do well to start with the way in which we are appointed . 
it is , I am sure you will agree , one of the chief criticisms directed at us . 
to overcome this , I would propose the appointment of senators by an independent , impartial body . 
this body could be made up , as an example , of chief justices from the various federal , provincial and territorial courts . 
a second option could be a group of Companions of the Order of Canada . 
the mandate of either group would be to choose people from a wide variety of fields and backgrounds , from academia and labour , from politics , business and all other walks of life to sit in the Senate - men and women who have something to contribute for the good of Canadians . 
in my reformed senate , the term of service would be limited to a maximum period of , let us say , seven or 10 years , with certain appointments made for a shorter period if a full term were not necessary . 
i will get to this in a moment . 
as for remuneration , I would propose a reasonable salary or a per diem plus reimbursement of expenses , such as travel and accommodation as per Treasury Board guidelines . 
in addition to limiting the time senators serve , I think that the number of senators could be reduced substantially , and they could be reorganized to reflect more equitably the regions they represent . 
personally , I feel that at the present time 66 permanent senators could effectively represent all regions , and I would divide them up as follows : 
there would be a maximum number of 15 senators for any province , regardless of increases in population , accomplishing the objective of making the institution more equitable . 
at the present time , I would suggest 15 senators from each of Ontario and Quebec , nine from B.C. , seven from Alberta , three each from Manitoba , Saskatchewan , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , and Newfoundland , two from P . E . I , and one each from the Yukon , the Northwest Territories and Nunavut . 
in addition , the Governor General , under advice of the nominating body , could add a number of temporary senators for a specific term to conduct or be part of specific studies or reviews . 
the number of such temporary senators would be limited to a maximum of 10 at any one time . 
each would be appointed for their expertise in a given area , regardless of province of residence . 
i think it would be impractical to impose regional representation for temporary senators , as many issues have a major impact only in specific areas or regions . 
as for the Speaker , that position could be filled by rotation from region to region by periodic elections , perhaps every two years . 
this new Senate would continue to review government legislation but it would only have a six - month suspensive veto . 
it would also be empowered to review all major political appointments made by the House of Commons , the Prime Minister and cabinet . 
further , the Senate , augmented by experts , could conduct royal commissions . 
this offers the additional benefit of major cost savings . 
we already have the premises , the staff , the equipment , the researchers , and research facilities . 
we could use them rather than setting up entirely new structures each time a royal commission is established , as is the case now . 
i also believe that the Senate ' s investigative powers should be expanded to include all major national and international issues such as free trade , education , abortion , euthanasia and so forth . 
we have more time to study issues in detail , away from the lights and cameras . 
while on the issue of the investigative role of the Senate , I should also mention the part played in the past few years by the Senate in amending and revising government legislation . 
on various occasions , the Senate has been called upon to fix bad or flawed bills that made their way here from the other place . 
examples of the type of legislation I am referring to include the Electoral Boundaries Acts , Bill C - 18 and Bill C - 69 , Bill C - 42 , the Judges Act and , more recently , Bill C - 220 . 
i should like to take a moment and read a couple of comments made by some members of the other place . 
the Justice Minister is now saying that if she had another opportunity , she would not vote for the bill . 
Mrs. Fry , the Secretary of the State for the Status of Women , said : 
i don ' t think I would , no . 
we ' re talking about a complex problem and we ' re trying present a simplistic solution to it . 
another member of the House says : 
i ' d say the House screwed up . 
the other matter that is before us right now is the Wheat Board issue , which is Bill C - 4 , and we will look forward to some interesting comments by our committee in the next few weeks . 
honourable senators , we cannot overlook the role played by the Senate in bringing to the attention of Canadians a number of important issues , such as the Pearson airport agreements , the Cape Breton coal industry and the Newfoundland schools question . 
thanks to the Senate , these and other important issues that the government had been anxious to sweep under the carpet , or push through Parliament , were afforded a greater degree of scrutiny than had been the case in the other place . 
for the most part , at least during the last dozen years or so , these people , and I include myself among their number , have too often fulfilled a role that , in its simplest form , boils down to facilitating the passage of legislation for the government of the day . 
the result , I think we all agree , is that the Senate as an institution has largely abandoned its role as protector or representative of the country ' s different regions and minority populations . 
to reverse this trend , I would propose grouping senators by region rather than by party . 
to do so would alter fundamentally the role we play here . 
instead of being simply representatives of our political parties , we would fulfil the Senate role of safeguarding regional and minority interests ; we would serve as bridges between our regions and our regions ' legislatures and the federal government . 
honourable senators , I realize that many of the ideas I have raised today are contentious . 
some would require constitutional amendments , which may be impossible to obtain in the short term . 
we should therefore consider looking for ways to effect changes that do not require constitutional amendments . 
time does not permit me to provide details to flesh out my different proposals . 
however , my intent is not to provide an in - depth blueprint for Senate reform . 
many others far more knowledgeable than I have addressed this issue in the past . 
my hope is to build on their contribution , to add my ideas to theirs , to stimulate debate , to provide impetus towards action . 
i said at the outset that I did not have all the answers . 
my remarks here today show that . 
while I do not have all the answers , I do have a keen and abiding interest in the welfare of this institution and , more particularly , in the health of our democracy . 
the Senate has an important part to play in Canadian life and politics . 
however , changes must be made in order for us to properly fulfil our role as a check on the government of the day . 
ultimately , the Senate should become the repository , the meeting - place of the best and the brightest Canada has to offer : men and women who come together solely to serve the interests of Canadians . 
at the same time , the Senate must become a far less partisan place . 
finally , honourable senators , we must have the courage to confront what has become an unpleasant and untimely untenable situation . 
our popularity and the people ' s confidence in us as an institution have descended to dangerous levels . 
we must act . 
if I were a physician , my prescription would be simple : 
senate , heal thyself . 
to achieve this , we must involve the public . 
the people must have their say . 
the boil must be lanced . 
we should not , and we cannot afford to be afraid to stand up and defend this institution . 
if the people want this place to change , then so be it , but let us be the leaders of the change rather than the reluctant followers . 
it will not be easy - major change rarely is - but I am confident that if there is a will , there is a way . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
will the honourable senator accept a question ? 
senator Di Nino : 
with pleasure . 
senator Gigant è s : 
the senators are named by the Governor in Council . 
this committee , you suggest , would make suggestions and the Governor in Council , that is the Prime Minister and his cabinet , must decide whether they follow the suggestions or not . 
is that not right ? 
senator Di Nino : 
obviously , as I said before , I am not sure I have all the answers , but on this issue let me give you my thoughts . 
i believe that the Governor in Council , or the governing council , should not make the appointments . 
i believe the appointments should be the prerogative of the Governor General at the recommendation of a committee , an impartial independent committee , as I said ; a body which would assess the needs of the country at that time and recommend , based on the needs of the country at that time , candidates for the Senate who could fulfil the role for the benefit of Canadians , and take away totally and completely the political aspect of the appointment . 
senator Gigant è s : 
this is all very fine , sir , but how do you deal with what the Constitution says ? 
senator Di Nino : 
i am only offering suggestions for consideration and debate . 
if we feel strongly enough , or if the Canadian public feels strongly enough , that these issues should be addressed , then , as we have done in the past , if we have the will , we can make constitutional changes . 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Di Nino : 
that is very interesting . 
i would have liked to expand a number of these issues in a way that would have taken half an hour , each and every one of them , and one of the issues is how does a provincial premier react to having an elected body called the Senate ? 
how much of that provincial premier ' s power and role in the relationship between the provinces and the federal government would be affected by that ? 
i do not know the answers , but that is a very good question . 
senator Gigant è s : 
unfortunately I do not wish to extend your time any further because my colleagues would like to go home . 
maybe we can continue this discussion , you and I , over lunch . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable Senator Gigant è s , as long you are buying , I will be there . 
senator Gigant è s : 
that is a typical Tory comment , sir . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , debate adjourned . 
security and Intelligence 
establishment of Special Committee 
resuming debate on the motion , as modified , of the Honourable Senator Kelly , seconded by the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme , P . C . : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to hear evidence on and consider matters relating to the threat posed to Canada by terrorism and the counter - terrorism activities of the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the current international threat environment with particular reference to terrorism as it relates to Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and report on the extent to which the recommendations of the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety ( June 1987 ) and the Report of the Special Committee on Terrorism and the Public Safety ( June 1989 ) have been addressed by the Government of Canada ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the threat assessment capability of the Government of Canada relative to the threat of terrorism ; 
that the Committee examine and make recommendations with respect to the leadership role , preparedness and review of those departments and agencies of the Government of Canada with counter - terrorism responsibilities ; 
that the Committee examine and assess the level of international cooperation between Canada and its allies with respect to the evolving nature of the terrorist threat ; 
that seven Senators , to be designated at a later date , act as members of the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to report from time to time , to send for persons , papers and records , and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; and 
that the Committee present its final report no later than September 29 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Kelly ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I understand that if Senator Kelly speaks now , he would close the debate because he has spoken earlier . 
he wishes to speak immediately after me , and I just have a few words to place on the record . 
when Senator Kelly first made this suggestion to the Senate of Canada , I think it was well received . 
the only difficulty we had on this side was that we were not exactly sure what would be the parameters of his study . 
certainly , we supported the concept of his study . 
senator Kelly has worked extremely hard both with the leadership on this side and , I am sure , on his side . 
he has also worked with the Solicitor General in terms of detailing exactly the work that will be done by this committee . 
i want the Senate to know that his study has the full support of this side of the chamber . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , as Senator Carstairs pointed out , if the Honourable Senator Kelly speaks now , his speech will have the effect of closing the debate on this motion . 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak ? 
if not , I recognize the Honourable Senator Kelly . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I tabled this motion to set up a special Senate committee on security and intelligence in December of 1997 . 
as I indicated then , I see the purpose of the committee being to assess our ability to stop actions or activities that threaten the security of Canada before they happen or to respond effectively to those that do . 
in doing so , the committee could build on the substantial foundation of work done by the Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety of 1987 and 1989 . 
as I said on December 2 , much has changed since the last committee on terrorism reported in 1989 . 
the Cold War may be over , but we now face the prospect of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , to renegade states and to any number of terrorist groups . 
we face a significantly higher risk from economic espionage . 
we also face an increasing threat from the convergence of criminal and terrorist organizations worldwide that increase the power of both . 
these are the types of issues the committee should examine . 
some have asked why the motion proposes a special committee on security and intelligence rather than another special committee on terrorism . 
the reason is to be able to cast the net of our review wider than terrorism in order to catch all the major security threats that face or may face this country . 
a nation ' s security is important . 
it is important , therefore , that this committee conduct its review carefully , objectively and without partisanship . 
the committee ' s goal must be to be helpful and constructive , to help the government get ahead of security threats , rather than react to them . 
in my experience , periodic reviews of this kind , if properly conducted , can be worthwhile . 
honourable senators , since I tabled my original motion in December of last year , I have met with a number of senior officials of the government with responsibilities or knowledge in the field of security . 
these have included the Deputy Secretary responsible for security and intelligence in the Privy Council Office , the Deputy Solicitor General , and most recently with Mr. Andy Scott , the Solicitor General himself . 
during these discussions , I was made aware that Minister Scott has already initiated a review of how well the government is prepared to respond to and manage terrorist threats to public safety and actual terrorist incidents . 
he has advised me that he welcomes the study proposed by the Senate committee but has asked that we might consider being somewhat more precise in our motion insofar as the areas to be covered are concerned . 
accordingly , I amended the original motion to reflect the areas set out by Minister Scott as being those which will best augment the review which the Solicitor General has under way . 
i have further amended the original motion because of the time which has elapsed , and I now suggest that the committee present its final report no later than September . 
this deadline will accommodate meetings which I believe may be necessary through the summer . 
honourable senators , I ask the approval of the chamber for this motion . 
motion agreed to . 
international Summit of Sexually Exploited Children and Youth 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Landon Pearson rose pursuant to notice of March 19 , 1998 : 
honourable senators , two weeks ago , 54 young people from Canada , the U.S. and Latin America , all of whom had been sexually exploited in childhood , gathered in Victoria to speak out and be heard . 
for those of us who were there to hear them , the experience was both heart - rending and inspirational - heart - rending because of the tragic nature of what they had to say , and inspirational because of their courage and their collective determination that other children should be spared their grief . 
" out from the Shadows " was a most unusual conference , one of a kind . 
there is considerable interest in holding others like it in South Africa , in Eastern Europe , and in several of the Asian countries because the commercial sexual exploitation of children is , alas , a global phenomenon , an illicit trade worth hundreds of millions of dollars , and a trade in which large numbers of people profit from the unspeakable suffering of the innocent . 
organizing an effective conference to give voice to young people who have been exploited and marginalized is a delicate task . 
the challenge that confronted the planning committee , which included myself and my co - chair , Cherry Kingsley , a young woman who knows only too well from her own experience what it is to be sexually exploited , was how to create a safe and appropriate environment that would enable the young delegates to come out from the shadows and tell their stories truthfully , trusting they would be heard . 
with Cherry ' s help and with the help of some of her colleagues at PEERS , the Prostitutes Empowerment Education and Resource Society , I am happy to say we were able to construct a surrounding that worked . 
once in Victoria , the young people found themselves in pleasant and tranquil surroundings , with comfortable beds , three full meals a day , and an extraordinary amount of emotional and practical support . 
we had a safe room open 24 hours a day , staffed by volunteer counsellors and doctors . 
we provided opportunities to the young people to express themselves through art , drama , music and creative writing , all with the help of gifted volunteers . 
the plenary sessions and the other activities were all adjusted to their specific needs . 
support people and the few invited professionals were kept in the background , asked to listen and not to talk . 
the young people responded with an extraordinary outburst of creativity . 
what they produced was painful , yes , and wrenching for them as well as for us , but deeply moving in the best sense . 
what struck me was that they were less enraged than outraged - outraged that a society fails to protect its children and allows the abuses , that they were strong enough to describe , to take place ; outraged by the predatory nature of the trade , the thoughtless , often brutal self - gratification of clients , and the greed and cruelty of other exploiters . 
before they came to Victoria , the young delegates of " Out from the Shadows " had all engaged in informal but carefully structured group discussions . 
in fact that was how they were selected . 
both the national and the international focus groups revealed a number of recurring themes in the life experiences of children and youth who enter the sex trade . 
i do not intend to recount their individual stories here , but you will not be surprised to learn that most of them involve poverty and abuse . 
for some of the girls , early pregnancies had driven them on to the streets . 
for others , boys and girls alike , homelessness , low self - esteem , and drug and alcohol addiction had made them easy prey to pimps . 
a certain number had led double lives , for only a small portion of prostitution takes place on the street . 
almost all complained of a lack of training and education , including education about human rights , and most of them had no one to talk to . 
summaries of both the national and international focus group discussions are available on my web site , sen . parl . gc . ca / lpearson / , as well as the Declaration and Agenda for Action and other documents related to the summit . 
this was the baggage the young people brought to Victoria , the material from which they fashioned their Declaration and Agenda for Action , a document entirely of their own making . 
cherry and the eight young delegates who chose to write it up stayed up one night until four in the morning and the next night until three . 
then they emerged , somewhat bleary - eyed , to present their finished piece brilliantly to a group of politicians from the federal government , from the Government of British Columbia , from Brazil , along with some other political representatives and international officials . 
we were all profoundly moved by their presentation and determined to respond . 
the federal government will provide support for an international follow - up specifically involving the young people from Latin America . 
the B.C. government announced $ 3 million for safe houses . 
other commitments were made , including personal ones from each one of us . 
honourable senators , please listen now to their own words . 
so many times our voices have not been heard . 
this Declaration presents our united voice , the voices of sexually exploited children and youth . 
we represent a cross - section of society and we have many stories . 
here you will hear our voice . 
declaration 
we , the sexually exploited child and youth delegates gathered in Victoria , Canada for Out From the Shadows - International Summit of Sexually Exploited Youth , declare the following : 
we declare that the term child or youth prostitute can no longer be used . 
these children and youth are sexually exploited and any language or reference to them must reflect this belief . 
we declare that the commercial sexual exploitation of children and youth is a form of child abuse and slavery . 
we declare that all children and youth have the right to be protected from all forms of abuse , exploitation and the threat of abuse , harm or exploitation . 
we declare that the commercial exploitation of children and youth must no longer be financially profitable . 
we declare that all children and youth have the right to know their rights . 
we declare that the issue of child and youth sexual exploitation must be a global priority and nations must not only hold their neighbours accountable but also themselves . 
we declare that governments are obligated to create laws which reflect the principle of zero tolerance of all forms of abuse and exploitation of children and youth . 
agenda for Action 
our Agenda contains actions that are based on our beliefs . 
our beliefs have come from what we have lived . 
to understand why these actions will work , you must understand our beliefs and the life experiences that have led to these beliefs . 
we believe that education is vital in our struggle against the sexual exploitation of children and youth . 
we believe that the voices and experiences of sexually exploited children and youth must be heard and be central to the development and implementation of action . 
we must be empowered to help ourselves . 
we believe that we have a right to resources that are directed towards sexually exploited children and youth and our very diverse needs . 
we believe that as children and youth , we are all vulnerable to sexual exploitation whether male , female , or transgendered . 
we believe that our laws must protect us as sexually exploited children and youth and no longer punish us as criminals . 
we believe that we are all responsible for our children and youth , yet the issue is not ours alone . 
governments , communities and society as a whole must be held accountable for the sexual exploitation of children and youth . 
i will not go on through the rest of their Agenda for Action , but I urge it to your attention . 
honourable senators , the purchase and use of the body of a child for sexual gratification is an abominable act and a desecration of the human spirit . 
we must all do what we can to reduce this deplorable practice . 
i know you are busy , we all are , but I urge you to read the declaration and agenda for action and ponder what the young delegates found the words to say . 
i promise that you will never think about young people engaged in prostitution and the people who purchase sex from them in the same way again . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
senator Pearson and her colleagues and all those involved in this summit should be congratulated . 
it is something we do not want to confront . 
i do not know why we are afraid to deal with this issue , but we seem to be . 
the honourable senator knows I had originally intended to participate . 
unfortunately , that was not to be . 
in extending my congratulations to her , I should like to urge that this body not end this debate today . 
i think it is an issue which Canada and Canadians must face , if not for the sake of ourselves , for the sake of our children . 
once again , congratulations , and let us continue the work . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 51 
Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
human Rights 
education System - Discrimination against Poor and Visible Minorities 
the Evolution of Canadian Federalism 
the Late Elias Freij 
former Mayor of Bethlehem , Israel - Tribute 
Quebec 
lack of Agreement in Naming English - Language School Boards 
the Honourable Louis J . Robichaud 
congratulations on Marriage 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
official Languages 
annual Report of Commissioner Tabled 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Examination of Governance Provisions Tabled 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
report of Committee 
adjournment 
visitor in the Gallery 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
notice of Motion to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Notice of Motion 
question PERIOD 
health 
restricted Application of Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Government Position 
Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency 
possible Cuts to Budget - Changes to Policy on Regional Economic Development - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
third Reading 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Continued 
royal Assent 
notice 
first Nations Government Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
consideration of Report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Examination of Governance Provisions 
international Trade 
trade Policy , Human Rights and the Concept of Ethical Sourcing on Imported Goods - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the Holocaust 
statement Issued by Vatican Viewed as Teaching Document - Inquiry 
business of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
human Rights 
education System - Discrimination against Poor and Visible Minorities 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , 30 years ago the Kerner Commission in the United States reported that America was in danger of becoming two societies - " one black , one white ; separate and unequal . " 
this month , the Milton S . Eisenhower Foundation reported that the Kerner Commission ' s predictions have been realized . 
the structural , vertical gaps are widening despite the 1954 Supreme Court ruling in Brown v. Board of Education . 
honourable senators may wonder what this has to do with Canada . 
unless our nation provides equality of opportunity to all Canadians - rich and poor , black and white , French and English - we stand to repeat the mistakes of America . 
you will find the education that is provided to be of unequal quality . 
the inner city areas will not have as well maintained schools , some will lack computers , and their facilities will not be as good . 
how , then , can we expect children who graduate from these schools to compete on an equal level for university acceptance ? 
how do we expect them to compete on an equal level in the job market ? 
poor children , whether urban or rural , need more support , not less , to overcome the obstacles to learning in their daily lives . 
since 1993 , this government has consistently cut transfer payments to the provinces which have , in turn , cut funding for educational programs . Who 
does this hurt the most - a school board in Oakville , Ontario , a city with one of the highest incomes per capita in the country ; or one like Scarborough , or Little Burgundy in Montreal ? 
when a province reacting to federal funding cuts allows university tuition to rise , who does it hurt ? 
once again , low - income Canadians pay the greater price . 
even when accepted into a university , students from low - income families continue to compete on an unequal playing field . 
it is amazing what a balanced budget will do . 
we now learn that this amount has been increased to $ 150 million . 
the government ' s own press release states : 
the key to growth and jobs in the years ahead is access to knowledge and skills . 
if Canadians are to prosper and achieve high living standards in the 21 st century , they must be equipped to fill the jobs of tomorrow . 
this government believes that there is no better investment in the future than investments in education , knowledge andinnovation . 
the CIBC recently released a report which estimates that the true number of unemployed youth to be about 200,000 . 
the Council on Welfare estimates that 10 per cent of Canadians are presently receiving welfare , the majority having a high school education or less . 
these are shocking statistics for a nation such as ours . 
clearly , education is the key to the future . 
this government ' s Millennium Scholarship Fund is too little , too late . 
many of us have been out of university for a long time and do not realize the true cost of a university education today . 
in Ontario , if a student lives in residence , their education will cost between $ 7,000 and $ 9,000 per year . 
most universities confirm that it will cost - including living expenses , books , et cetera - close to $ 13,000 to $ 17,000 a year per student . 
with a balanced budget , is it is time to get our priorities straight . 
it is time to invest in the future of our children . 
after all , they are the future of our country . 
the Millennium Scholarship Fund should be implemented now , not in the year 2000 . 
honourable senators , we have a role to play . 
the Senate completed a study in 1977 on post - secondary education which detailed the gravity of the problem . 
we must join together to insist that the government address the concerns of low - income students in a meaningful way . 
we must not repeat the mistakes of our American neighbour . 
the Evolution of Canadian Federalism 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , Canadian federalism has evolved as a result of constitutional amendments , administrative agreements , and court decisions . 
since 1982 , there have been eight formal constitutional amendments : aboriginal rights , in 1983 ; electoral representation , in 1985 ; the Newfoundland school system , in 1987 , 1997 and 1998 ; the rights of the two linguistic communities in New Brunswick , in 1993 ; the Prince Edward Island bridge , in 1994 ; and the Quebec school system , in 1997 . 
who could have predicted in 1982 that section 43 of the bilateral amending formula would be used successfully on six occasions within such a short time ! 
other amendments , of a non - constitutional nature , were also made in the aftermath of the Quebec referendum of October 30 , 1995 . 
these were : the two motions recognizing the distinct character of Quebec , the first adopted by the House of Commons and the second by the Senate , in 1995 ; the coming into force in 1996 of the Constitutional Amendment Act ( regional vetoes ) ; the signing of administrative agreements on manpower training with several provinces , Quebec included , in 1997 - 98 . 
since December 1997 , resolutions of a non - constitutional nature approving the Calgary Declaration have been adopted by the following legislative assemblies : 
Newfoundland , on December 2 ; Alberta , on December 10 ; Saskatchewan , on December 16 ; New Brunswick , on December 17 . 
prince Edward Island , Ontario , Nova Scotia , British Columbia and Manitoba have concluded their public hearings , and a vote will be held soon in their legislative assemblies . 
it is to be hoped that all the legislative assemblies will adopt the principles of the Calgary Declaration . 
i have always said that this was a first step . 
premier Romanow shares that opinion . 
the declaration could be a useful tool in the hands of the federalists . 
the Late Elias Freij 
former Mayor of Bethlehem , Israel - Tribute 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , this weekend Mr. Elias Freij , the former mayor of Bethlehem and minister of Tourism for the Palestinian Authority , passed away at the age of 80 years . 
some senators may remember Mr. Freij , who came to Canada in 1983 as a witness for the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
Mr. Freij was a very dignified man . 
the next day , Mr. Berger was required to apologize in the House of Commons . 
the mayor commented on the insult by inviting Mr. Berger to visit the West Bank and witness the life of Palestinians in the West Bank . 
Mr. Freij added : " When you live under military occupation and you are ruled by military administration , you are not a free citizen . " 
i have no doubt that Mr. Berger , now known as His Excellency the Ambassador of Canada to Israel , took the time to visit the West Bank . 
Mr. Freij was a great man who devoted 25 years of his life to his people before he resigned as mayor and minister of Tourism for the Palestine Authority last year . 
the two main causes of my life have been , first , understanding the role of Quebec in Canada ; and , second , foreign affairs . 
i would invite members to read the transcript of June 14 , 1983 , of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs under the extraordinary chairmanship of the late Honourable Senator George C . Van Roggen . 
honourable senators , the world has certainly lost an architect of peace and a great man . 
Quebec 
lack of Agreement in Naming English - Language School Boards 
hon. Dalia Wood : 
honourable senators , I wish to share another example of the Quebec government ' s bureaucracy hard at work . 
i still wonder about that , especially in light of hassles that have already surfaced . 
it seems that the provisional school councils are having difficulty choosing names that satisfy the Quebec Toponymy Commission . 
the people of Quebec would be shocked if they knew that such a thing existed , and that their tax dollars are paying for it . 
let me give you a few examples . 
the Western English School Board had decided to call itself the Lower Canada School Board . 
the Toponymy Commission rejected that name because it was not geographically correct . 
the board then changed the name to the Lester B . Pearson School Board . 
the commission has now told them that they must hyphenate the name to differentiate it from the former Prime Minister ' s name . The 
sir Wilfrid Laurier School Board on Montreal ' s south shore has also been told that they must hyphenate their name . 
honourable senators , everyone knows that that is grammatically incorrect , but that does not seem to matter . 
grammar is not as important as geography when choosing the name of a school board . 
the commission intervened . 
even though this exercise was for the sole purpose of creating linguistic school boards , the word " English " was not acceptable if it was used as an adjective to the words " school board . " 
the name " English Montreal School Board " would be acceptable if the board added a hyphen and an accent to it so that the name would read " English - Montr é al School Board . " 
am I crazy or does this border on the absurd ? 
is this a scene out of a George Orwell novel ? 
unfortunately , it is not . 
this is the kind of pettiness the English - speaking people in the province of Quebec must endure on a daily basis . 
the Honourable Louis J . Robichaud 
congratulations on Marriage 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , we would like to join with Senator Graham in wishing Senator Robichaud and his wife , Jacky , all the best . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
i would like to join my two colleagues in congratulating my good friend Senator Robichaud . 
if my predecessor , the Honourable Azellus Denis , who sat in the House of Commons for 28 years and in the Senate for another 28 , were here today instead of me , I am sure he would have been one of the rare senators to attend this wonderful wedding . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
official Languages 
annual Report of Commissioner Tabled 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the annual report of the Commissioner of Official Languages for 1997 . 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Examination of Governance Provisions Tabled 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Tkachuk , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 97 ( 3 ) , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration later this day . 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
report of Committee 
hon. Charlie Watt , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal People has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred the Bill C - 8 , An Act respecting an Accord between the Governments of Canada and the Yukon Territory relating to the administration and control of legislative jurisdiction in respect of oil and gas , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated Wednesday , March 25 , 1998 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read a third time ? 
on motion of Senator Lucier , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , April 1 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
motion agreed to . 
visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to a guest in the Speaker ' s Gallery . 
it is Mrs. Catherine Twinn , wife of our deceased colleague Senator Walter Twinn . 
welcome to the Senate , Mrs. Twinn . 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , April 1 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications be authorized for its study of Bill C - 9 , the Canada Marine Act , to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
notice of Motion to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , April 1 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays for the duration of its study of Bill C - 9 , the Canada Marine Act , even though the Senate may then be sitting and that Rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Notice of Motion 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , April 2 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Senate urge the governments of the provinces and territories to ensure that their laws respecting the enforcement of interprovincial subpoenas explicitly provide that they are applicable , not only to courts of law , but also to commissions of inquiry ; 
that the Senate also urge the government of any province or territory to amend such laws where they are not clearly applicable to commissions of inquiry in order to remove any doubt ; and 
that a message be sent to the Assemblies of the provincial and territorial legislatures to acquaint them accordingly . 
question PERIOD 
health 
restricted Application of Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the Minister of Health , Mr. Allan Rock , has refused to compensate almost half the victims who were infected with hepatitis C . Instead , he will only compensate an estimated 22,000 who were infected between the years 1986 and 1990 . 
he calls this " a humanitarian and fair offer . " 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator raises one of the most distressing problems that has come before all of the governments in the country and , indeed , the Canadian public . 
i do know how strongly the members of the government feel and , in particular , how the Minister of Health feels and how sad he is that he cannot go further on this particular question . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
why not ? 
senator Graham : 
it is a question of where you draw the line . 
senator Kinsella : 
how did he draw the line ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
there is no line . 
what line ? 
senator Graham : 
it is a tragic situation , and it is really a question of where can you reasonably draw the line , not just for hepatitis C victims but for victims of other very serious diseases . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
did you read the Krever report ? 
what did Justice Krever say about drawing the line ? 
shame ! 
senator Kinsella : 
shameful ! 
senator Oliver : 
i heard what the honourable senator said , but clearly this was an accounting decision and not one based upon humanitarian measures . 
for instance , West Germany began testing for hepatitis C as early as 1981 , and Canada could have used their test but chose not to do that . 
given the fact that a test existed which Canada could have used , will the leader of the government justify to those affected between 1981 and 1986 why the Government of Canada turned its back on them ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , it is really a question of talking about periods of time . 
you mentioned 1991 , when my honourable friend ' s own party was in government . 
the offer today recognizes that some of the infections in the 1986 to 1990 period could possibly have been avoided , and provides assistance to those people . 
the announcement ends the uncertainty for those facing what could have been a long legal process . 
it is very unfortunate that , under the circumstances , the government could not have gone further . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
shame , absolute shame ! 
the Minister of Health is a lawyer ; what do you expect ? 
Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency 
possible Cuts to Budget - Changes to Policy on Regional Economic Development - Government Position 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i wish to direct my question to the minister , who I know has a special interest in regional development in Atlantic Canada . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
a lot of good it did him in the election . 
senator Kinsella : 
is it true that the President of the Treasury Board , Mr. Mass é , in tabling in the other place budget documents affecting ACOA , indicated that the budget for ACOA is expected to shrink by some $ 100 million ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the budget documents which have been tabled by the Treasury Board President are public documents , and my honourable friend has access to them just as I do . 
senator Kinsella : 
with respect to the question of government policy , has the Government of Canada ' s policy changed with respect to maintaining the level of funding in ACOA that has been available hitherto for that regional development agency ? 
senator Graham : 
i would hope that ACOA would have sufficient funds to meet the economic development needs that are required in Atlantic Canada . 
senator Kinsella : 
regarding the policy of this government , is government policy changing in relation to regional economic development ? 
in the past , we have always had a minister who was responsible for ACOA , and generally it was a minister from the region . 
now that we have one , namely , Mr. Manley , who is not from the region , we seem to be having a downsizing of assistance , and development assistance in particular that , up until this time , government policy was based on , which policy was to have the funds to deal with regional economic development in Atlantic Canada . 
is there , or is there not , a change in government policy ? 
senator Graham : 
there is no change in government policy , honourable senators . 
the minister directly responsible for ACOA is Minister Mifflin . 
as you know , there are several regional development agencies across the country . 
minister Manley has the final responsibility in terms of reporting to government for all of those development agencies . 
orders OF THE DAY 
appropriation Bill No. 1 , 1998 - 99 
third Reading 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
small Business Loans Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
[ English ] 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Ferretti Barth , for the third reading of Bill C - 17 , An Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare , that the Bill be not now read the third time but that it be amended : 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 4 to 10 ; and 
( b ) on pages 1 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 2 to 24 as clauses 1 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
2 . in clause 3 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 18 and 19 ; 
( b ) on page 2 , 
( i ) by deleting the heading preceding line 1 , and 
( ii ) by deleting lines 1 to 40 ; 
( c ) on page 3 , by deleting lines 1 to 15 ; and 
( d ) on pages 3 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 4 to 24 as clauses 3 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
3 . in clause 6 on page 4 , by replacing line 36 with the following : 
" person who provides basic telecommunications services to con - " . 
4 . in clause 7 
( a ) on page 5 , by deleting lines 10 to 18 ; and 
( b ) on pages 5 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 8 to 24 as clauses 7 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I rise today as sponsor of Bill C - 17 , the bill involving amendments to the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Act . 
honourable senators , comments made last week in this house on the subject of Bill C - 17 appeared to question the integrity of Industry Canada , the CRTC and even the Stentor group , which vigorously support this important bill . 
i would therefore once again like to explain why it is in the public interest to have a licensing regime in Canada for international telecommunications service providers and to answer the questions raised last week by my honourable colleague Senator Oliver . 
first , I would like to thank my colleague . 
he contributes to debates in this house with his thorough knowledge and understanding of the telecommunications industry . 
he has made strong arguments in the past . 
i was somewhat surprised at the vehemence of Senator Oliver ' s argument that public interest policy in no way justified the establishment of this sort of regime , which would be administered by the CRTC . 
in expressing his concerns , he has indicated his desire for policies that serve the telecommunications industry in Canada and , in the end , consumers . 
we agree on the objective . 
i would have expected his participation in the hearings of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications would have eased his fears . 
i was rather surprised to hear him say that the witnesses ' statements were inadequate and negligent . 
i would first off like to refute his allegation that Industry Canada ' s method to promote the awarding of licenses by the CRTC is inadequate , that the department ' s attacks were merely token protests and that the proposed licensing regime amounts to , and I quote : 
... excessive and redundant regulation . 
i would remind you that almost all countries with deregulation policies have licensing regimes . 
nearly all the witnesses appearing before the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications acknowledged the need for such a regime . 
honourable senators , I feel obliged to repudiate the arguments advanced against this bill last week in this chamber . 
the thrust of what was said involved action that was taken to prevent an abusive situation involving Hong Kong Tel . 
it should be noted that that case was resolved prior to the new World Trade Organization rules coming into force , and required an onerous process to collect evidence . 
the traffic routing rules mentioned were merely one aspect of the situation . 
Hong Kong Tel was able to give its Canadian affiliate a preferential price to terminate calls in Hong Kong that was not offered to any other service provider operating in Canada . 
in the absence of license conditions , the violation of the routing rules represented the most efficient way of dealing with that case . 
returning to the licensing provisions , I should like to point out that we believe in taking preventive measures - in taking action before problems occur , not afterwards . 
that is why we are eliminating the Teleglobe monopoly . 
these licensing provisions will apply only to international services . 
unfortunately , many countries in the world still remain monopolies . 
they can , for example , abuse their monopoly position by insisting that Canadian carriers and consumers pay exorbitant rates to call overseas . 
under the old rules , Teleglobe was positioned to counter this threat itself . 
without a licencing regime , Canada ' s new competition markets would be exposed to pressure from foreign monopolies trying to secure much lower prices . 
this is exactly the kind of problem that these licensing regimes will allow us to police . 
if I understand the senator ' s remarks correctly , part of his concern rests with his apparent belief that these problems are either exaggerated or non - existent . 
i am pleased to say that I agree with him on this point . 
the problems have been relatively minor in the past , and we intend to keep it that way . 
we on the committee heard ample testimony from the industry as to the potential for abuse . 
they explained to us , using complicated diagrams , the various means by which telecommunications traffic is effectively smuggled through third countries so that its origin can be disguised . 
the potential for abuse is so great that most other countries , including our great free trading partner to the south , the U.S. , have introduced licensing regimes or are planning to do so . 
honourable senators , we are confident , based on our understanding of the market - place and on the testimony of the witnesses that appeared before the committee , that these licensing provisions are required . 
the other point the honourable senator made was that the cure is worse than the disease , that the problems of licensing outweigh any benefits , and that the proposed regime represents excessive and redundant regulation . 
what he failed to point out - and I do it out of full respect - is that the very treaty , the GATS agreement on basic telecommunication , that this legislation is helping to implement , specifically requires that licensing be on an open entry basis , be no more burdensome than necessary , and be implemented in a transparent fashion . 
we have had the benefit of having had the respected vice - chairman of the CRTC , Mr. David Colville , appear before the standing committee . 
he addressed this very issue in committee . 
in this new environment , the commission will require new tools to ensure that the objectives of the Telecommunications Act continue to be met . 
further , Mr. Colville said : 
by giving the commission that authority , the licensing power would enable the commission to ensure that a level playing field exists for all players in the market for the provision of international telecommunication services , and would allow the commission to accomplish that task with a minimal amount of interference in the marketplace . 
there may have been concern in the industry on this issue , but I know from my conversations with the industry that they took considerable comfort from Mr. Colville ' s testimony when he promised that the use of the licensing provision would be " light - handed . " 
in short , I hope the honourable senator ' s criticisms in this respect , are appeased . 
honourable senators , I hope this sets the record straight in this chamber . 
the time has come to press forward with this bill and enter the era of liberalization and globalization of the telecommunications industry . 
we have made commitments at the World Trade Organization , along with some 70 other countries . 
in amending the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Act , we are opening the way for new players in the telecommunications business . 
a monopoly situation here at home will give way to a more competitive market in which participants play by the same rules under a light - handed licensing protocol envisaged by Mr. Colville and this government . 
we are ensuring the new system will not be open to unfair practices by foreign monopolies because the legislation gives the CRTC the tools it needs to promote fair and effective competition without the threat of anti - competitive business practices in reselling and in accounting practices . 
honourable senators , I ask you to rally around this bill so that Canadian companies can reach out in the world with their technological knowledge and marketing flair . 
we have everything to gain and nothing to loss . 
i thank you for your support . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , when observers engage in debate to express thoughts that cross the mind , often it is like ships passing in the night in that we do not seem to connect . 
i say that because there has not yet been an engagement on the points raised by my colleague the Honourable Senator Oliver , who has laid some amendments on the table here in the house . 
if we are to engage in debate around the principles contained in the amendments proposed by Senator Oliver , perhaps the Senate might consider sending this matter back to the committee to gain the benefit of the wisdom of the committee , which is knowledgeable in the detail of this bill . 
i wish to look more closely at what has been said . 
therefore , I will adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
royal Assent 
notice 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that the following communication had been received : 
31 March 1998 
sir , 
deputy Secretary , Policy , Program and Protocol 
the Honourable 
the Speaker of the Senate 
second Reading 
honourable senators , this bill , providing for self - government by the First Nations of Canada , has been introduced in the last two Parliaments , but it was not dealt with because of prorogation . 
therefore , in conjunction with Senator Adams , I am introducing it again . 
senator Adams has replaced the late Senator Walter Twinn as a seconder . 
this bill is a testament to their brilliance at recognizing an opportunity to bring a piece of legislation to the Senate . 
outlining the legal , historical and treaty obligations between the Crown and its Indian people is something for which we can all be thankful . 
at a time when the institution of the Senate is under attack , we should adopt the vision of Senator Twinn that all of us can make a difference . 
i will not repeat the speech I gave to the Senate on May 4 , 1995 . 
those of you who were not here at the time may refer to it in the Debates of the Senate . 
however , what I want to do today is to ensure that the broad principles of the bill - those principles being self - government by First Nations people - are laid out and that they inspire fellow senators with the same sense of opportunity and mission that I have , as do others in the Senate , for this piece of legislation . 
senator Twinn worked on this bill previous to it being brought before this chamber when the main principles of the bill were part of an agreement that he had reached with the Government of Canada . 
again , the bill was never dealt with by the Government of Canada and the Sawridge Reserve because of the 1993 federal election and other factors that caused it to die on the Order Paper . 
however , it had been passed by the cabinet , and referendums had been held on the reserve . 
in my speech in May of 1995 , I detailed the history of this bill and the obligations of the Government of Canada and ourselves . 
bill S - 14 , the First Nations Government Bill , is testimony to the value of an unelected Senate . 
we are free here to act against the excesses of bureaucratic activism because this bill eliminates the powers of the Department of Indian Affairs . 
it is not in their self - interest , frankly . 
the lobbying for Indian interests has become a huge industry , which we have helped perpetuate by not discussing the question of self - government , and by allowing others to take it from our hands , not only in the Senate but in the other place . 
the elected people of this country are not discussing the issue either . 
the lobby industry is driven by hundreds of millions of dollars of cash going to consultants and lawyers rather than to the future well - being of the Indian people . 
bill S - 14 is a piece of legislation that allows bands to opt in with the consent of their people . 
it stares self - government in the face . 
it provides a regulatory and constitutional framework for self - government . 
it challenges all of us in the Senate ; it challenges the Canadian people and it challenges the bands , the Indians themselves . 
the challenge for us is to debate this issue , which I alluded to at some length in my previous speech on the bill . 
i think this is most important . 
senator Watt , as Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples , is doing the people a great service by studying the self - government aspects of the most recent royal commission report . 
bill S - 14 will provide a realistic framework towards a workable solution . 
honourable senators , Parliament has not debated this issue . 
we pass self - government bills with speed . 
that is vulgar , frankly , considering the amount of money involved and the jurisdictional powers involved . 
we act through guilt rather than reason , and we pass bills quickly because of past wrongs . 
bill S - 14 is , in its simplicity , a bill in the debate of which we can all participate . 
if you read the bill , there is something in there for everyone : constitutional lawyers ; constitutional experts ; academics ; provincial - federal relations ; provincial and federal powers versus municipal powers ; our relationship to communities ; and , more important , our relationship amongst ourselves . 
the Canadian people also need to be involved in this debate . 
in B.C. today , there are land claims exceeding 100 per cent of the territory of that province . 
we cannot sit here waist - deep in a legal quagmire without getting on to discussing the principles of self - government . 
we do not even know what they are . 
leave the people confused : 
that is what is happening today . 
we can see it , but we do not want to hear it . 
i guarantee to all of you that we will have problems with race relations that will make Wounded Knee look like a Sunday school picnic . 
senators from B.C. know what is happening in British Columbia ; to find out , they just talk to the people there about what they think of the pressing claims of the Indian people in that province . 
Indian people are not the white man ' s burden . 
taxing non - native Canadians to give money without responsibility is an act of unmitigated corruption . 
it is corrupt to do that to people . 
it does not lead to prosperity but , for most , misery . 
let us find a way to give First Nations an opportunity to look after themselves . 
by denying them that opportunity , we are on a freight train to disaster . 
let us begin a communication of equal partners , rather than acting as paternalistic colonialists , which is what we have been doing . 
after all , we are all citizens of the same country ; we all live in the same land , and we are all equal before the law . 
we share the obligations to ensure a true dialogue . 
the Senate must show courage and it must show leadership . 
for the Indian people , self - government is an opportunity and a challenge . 
they have been asking for it . 
by opting into this bill , they begin a process that gives them the same station in life that we all enjoy . 
surely , we cannot possibly expect that department to go on forever , growing by leaps and bounds in its spending . 
these people can govern themselves without the department interfering in their affairs . 
honourable senators , I ask you today to become involved in a process that you will find intellectually exciting , invigorating and satisfying . 
let us clear the cobwebs of centuries of neglect and get on with the business at hand . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Tkachuk for his remarks this afternoon with respect to Bill S - 14 . 
we have had this bill before us in principle , that is for second reading , twice before . 
both times the bill has ended up before the Aboriginal Peoples Committee . 
it appears to me that no time is more appropriate for this bill to go to committee than at this particular moment , when the Aboriginal Peoples Committee has chosen to do a special study on the whole issue of self - government , particularly in view of the recommendations by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples . 
with those few remarks , this side is more than delighted to send this bill to committee so that the study of this bill may take place in conjunction with the special study . 
many of the witnesses , I understand , have contributions to make to both the study and the bill . 
a melding of both matters would be an appropriate way of dealing with the issue of self - government and would provide the study that is much needed in this nation . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Tkachuk , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act 
consideration of Report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Examination of Governance Provisions 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the eleventh report of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce regarding governance provisions set out in the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board Act ( previously Bill C - 2 ) , entitled The Canada Pension Plan Investment Board : 
getting it Right , tabled in the Senate on March 31 , 1998 . 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I have earlier this day tabled the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce on the subject of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board , which came from legislation tabled by Minister of Finance Paul Martin in the fall which amended the Canada Pension Plan Investment Act . 
i believe this report is a testament to the work of the upper chamber . 
many use the word " non - partisan " - something I would hope I am never accused of being - to describe our work . 
in fact , the quality of this work is a result of partisanship . 
our committee would never have studied the bill with the same diligence if it were not for partisanship . 
in December of 1997 , the Conservative caucus in the Senate used democratic actions to slow business in this place because it believed that Bill C - 2 was too important to rubber - stamp . 
as a result of our actions , Finance Minister Paul Martin appeared before us in Committee of the Whole to discuss and answer questions on Bill C - 2 . 
we agreed that partisan debate about the peoples ' pensions would have a forum - our Parliament . 
we recommended that the annual report be tabled in Parliament and be referred to a standing committee in each House . 
we also recommend that the shareholders of the corporation appoint the auditor and that shareholders be represented by the minister responsible . 
that makes the minister answerable to Parliament for the appointment . 
as well , because the audited statement is part of the annual report , a standing committee can question the chairman and the CEO . 
my colleagues on this side and I would prefer that the Auditor General be the auditor , but certainly we welcome the recommendation that the board ' s watchdog be chosen by the minister and not by the board , as takes place in most Crown corporations . 
the original intent was to let the board choose , and this was reflected in the act that was passed in both the House of Commons and this place . 
indeed , if the Auditor General is not chosen as auditor , then the minister would have to answer for that decision in Parliament . 
i want to highlight a few recommendations . 
we were also concerned about the independence and competence of the board . 
we believed this affected the confidence and ability of the Government of Canada to actually devise a plan that would provide pensions 20 or 30 years down the road . 
we believed - and rightly so because it was expressed by many of the witnesses - that there was a lack of confidence about whether the young people of today would be able to collect pensions in the future . 
the temptation to appoint friends of the minister or the government in power , despite the higher competence of others , would eventually prove hard to resist . 
most of us are not immune to this pressure as we have seen , from time to time , in governments past and present . 
we recommend that the board members be chosen from the list provided by the nominating committee . 
we believe that it meets the aforementioned concern , as does the recommendation that a majority of board members have expertise in pension fund management and other relevant scales . 
the recommendation that board members be evaluated on their performance prior to their reappointment will also help to ensure that they take their job seriously . 
on many occasions there would be three or four members missing , which would mean that issues were being dealt with by a small portion of the whole board . 
we recommend that the minister be required to select names only from the list of candidates provided by the permanent nominating committee - which now is a temporary nominating committee . 
in other words , it serves at the pleasure of the minister . 
we also wanted to ensure that the appointment process be an open process , publicized in an appropriate manner . 
we found out from one of the people on the appointment committee that it is an open process , except that no one knows about it . 
in other words , people can actually apply to be board members ; other people can recommend board members . 
we recommend also that the people of Canada be informed that it is an open process . 
there would thus be the opportunity for people to participate , and lend their expertise . 
we recommend strict conflict - of - interest guidelines following such models as the Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement System . 
we recommend the creation of multiple funds because of the size of the fund , and that that be considered under each triennial review as the size of the fund increases . 
we also recommend that the Minister of Finance introduce changes and amendments to the CPP Act to increase the foreign content limit from the current 20 per cent to 30 per cent and , in the longer term , abolish the limits completely . 
on the question of regulations , we recommend that proposed regulations be deposited with the Clerk of each House at least 30 days prior to their coming into effect . 
any standing committee of the Senate and / or the House of Commons could review those regulations . 
if no one does , then they go into effect . 
honourable senators , this was an important study because it dealt with the corporate governance of government institutions , Crown corporations and agencies . 
the growing use of these boards and agencies to deliver programs demands that we be ever vigilant . 
the management of government programs must not simply be handed off to boards without ensuring that proper structures for governance and accountability are in place . 
over the next few months , we will see more of this . 
there will be legislation for a revenue agency to collect taxes , a Parks Canada agency to operate parks , and a Canadian Millennium Scholarship Fund to administer scholarships . 
those of us on this side of the house will be paying close attention to the governance structures proposed by these agencies . 
we should consider this as preserving the very integrity of Parliament . 
i wish to thank our caucus for its determination last December . 
your hard work gave us the opportunity to carry out our parliamentary duties in a responsible fashion , which I believe we all did on the committee . 
i also wish to thank Senator Pitfield , who is not a member of our caucus but who spoke eloquently to the principles that I and others raised in a rather political fashion . 
he presented his points in a scholarly fashion . 
members from both sides referred to his speech as we undertook this study . 
we have asked the minister to take our recommendations seriously , and I should like to table with the Senate a letter that our chairman , Senator Kirby , sent to the Minister of Finance , asking him for a reply to the recommendations we had submitted . 
i should like to say that our caucus , both in the Senate and in the other place , will continue to press for amendments that we recommended to this bill , and that are reflected in this report . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this matter will be considered debated . 
international Trade 
trade Policy , Human Rights and the Concept of Ethical Sourcing on Imported Goods - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein rose pursuant to notice of December 16 , 1997 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to Canada ' s Trade Policy , human rights , and the concept of ethical sourcing on imported goods . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I should like to congratulate Senator Grafstein for bringing this matter to the attention of the Senate . 
i am eagerly awaiting his comments on the topic . 
in fact , we are both members of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , and from time to time the committee does touch on matters such as these . 
knowing my colleague Senator Grafstein rather well , I have learned to appreciate him over the years . 
i wish to tell him that I look forward to the comments he will make with respect to this matter . 
on motion of Senator Corbin , debate adjourned . 
the Holocaust 
statement Issued by Vatican Viewed as Teaching Document - Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein rose pursuant to notice of March 25 , 1998 : 
honourable senators , at the outset of this inquiry , let me say that I approach this subject with some trepidation , and a deep feeling of inadequacy . 
more than 50 Passover and Easter seasons have passed since the furnaces of the Holocaust cooled and closed down . 
in a way , one could read the document as a collective mea culpa . 
in a covering letter , His Holiness Pope John Paul II hoped that the document " will help to heal the wounds of misunderstanding and injustices . " 
some leading Catholic observers and others have noted that the document now leaves room for the Pope to make an even stronger statement in the future . 
other Catholic observers expect that the document will serve as a teaching document for the church in all its aspects . 
why , honourable senators will ask , should one senator bring this document to the Senate ' s attention ? 
i hope those in the church hierarchy - from whom we heard in abundance in the Senate respecting the importance of Catholic religious education - will advise us in the Senate what concrete steps by the Canadian Conference of Bishops and other professors of the faith will be taken to use this important historic document as a teaching tool in the schools , churches and beyond into the public arena across Canada . 
other observers have noted that the document falls short in its historical analysis of the responsibility or role of the Church with respect to the root causes and the implementation of the Holocaust . 
before I turn to that aspect of this inquiry , let me remind honourable senators that I had previously drawn the Senate ' s attention to the consequences of nationalism as a source of 20 th century malaise . 
indeed , as if to support my contention , the Vatican document makes two telling references to the invidious role that nationalism played in the larger history that led to the Holocaust . 
first , the document notes that : 
... in the 19 th century a false and extremist nationalism took hold . 
later the document notes : 
... that an extremist form of nationalism was heightened in Germany .... 
in that clear sense , the Church reminds us all of the dangers inherent in nationalism . 
nationalist ideology was a political engine that propelled a horrific state agenda of preference , then discrimination , followed by exclusion , segregation and , ultimately , extinction . 
the " Final Solution " was seen as a considered , logical extension of a nationalist agenda . 
for me , the first lesson of the Holocaust is the intrinsic danger of temporal nationalism encouraged or accommodated by a non - secular acquiescence if not acceptance . 
pope John Paul II has espoused the primacy of individuality over collectivity . 
in his encyclical Centesimus Annus , he wrote : 
something is owed to human beings because they are human beings . 
honourable senators , the church militant has always been a source of intense historic interest to me , in particular the nature of leadership . 
i belong to the school which believes that trends in history can be altered by individual leadership . 
let me take this opportunity to share some of my thoughts with you respecting the role of leadership and , in this case , the papacy through the ages . 
what should we remember ? 
let us start with the example of Gregory the Great , the sixth - century Pope who supported laws preventing Jews from holding public office or building synagogues or practising trades . 
promulgated as a papal bull , a successor , Pope Stephen IV , continued to promote these restrictions . 
with the advent and the birth of the first idea of Europe , Christian Europe , the first European Holy Roman Emperor , Charlemagne the Great , showed leadership by ignoring and strongly objecting to a litany of papal edicts and restrictions against Jews at that time . 
later , Clement III even tried to prevent newly baptized Jews from joining the Church . 
this conduct contrasted with Bernard de Clairvaux , a founder of a Cisterian monastery , who warned : 
whoever makes an attempt on a life of a Jew , sins as if he attacked Jesus himself . 
Bernard de Clairvaux earned his sainthood in that dark and medieval age . 
of course , we have Pope Urban V , who praised the death of Pedro I of Spain because that Spanish monarch established a liberal regime of privileges and sanctuary for Jews in his time . 
on the other hand , we discover the words of St. Thomas Aquinas , author of Summa Theologica , who harshly criticized the murder of Jews , contending that : 
Jews should be preserved as eternal witnesses to the truth of Christianity . 
Gregory VII repeatedly sought to restrict Jews holding any office . 
we then have the case of Sixtus IV , who authorized the Spanish Inquisition under pressure from Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain . 
thereafter , however , Sixtus IV tried to moderate the harshness of this miserable period by allowing peaceful relations with Jews within his domains in Italy . 
in the 16 th century we can turn to Leo X , who re - established privileges accorded to Jews in French papal territory despite the vigorous protest of the cardinals there . 
it was Leo X who ended the requirement of Jews wearing a badge in his French domain and let this obligation lapse into disuse within his Italian domain . 
he went further and encouraged Jews to practise professions and participate in the arts. 
later in the 16 th century , we discover the leadership of Clement VII , who allowed Jews to profess openly , established courts to settle disputes between Christians and Jews , and allowed Inquisition refugees to settle in Anacona on the Adriatic as a sanctuary . 
Clement VII also allowed Jews to practise their trades and their professions . 
through the thickets of European history , we can perceive the papacy oscillating from protection to prosecution . 
honourable senators , the road to progress and humanity is by a steep and winding stairway until we approach the common era in the gates of the Holocaust itself . 
it was Pius IX , in the middle of the 19 th century , who ascended St. Peter ' s throne and who refused the right of Jews to live beyond ghetto walls , acquire land , engage in trade or enter into professions in Rome . 
in a throwback to centuries past , he even forbade Jewish doctors to attend Christian patients . 
all these prohibitions served as eerie yet precise forerunners of the infamous 1930 s Nazi laws of discrimination and deprivation less than a century later . 
in spirit , we are all Semites . 
Pius XI went even further and condemned Mussolini ' s laws " as a disgraceful imitation of Hitler ' s Nordic mythology . " 
reportedly the same Pius XI was planning even stronger denunciations when he died suddenly on February 10 , 1939 . 
then , honourable senators , he was succeeded to the papacy by Pius XII. 
the Vatican document makes reference to Pius XII and stated that he personally and through his representatives saved hundreds of thousands of Jewish lives . 
in one study done about this period respecting Rome and environs , a historian came up with the precise figures that 477 Jews were sheltered within the Vatican walls and another 4,238 found refuge in Rome ' s monasteries and convents . 
yes , it is clear that in 1944 , when Hungarian Jews were threatened with extinction , Pius XII did speak out loudly and clearly against the expulsions that ultimately led those Jews to the death camps . 
of course , by then , Rome was safely in Allied hands . 
... individual duty to obey the imperatives of conscience . 
cardinal Tisserant went on in despair : 
i am afraid that history may be obliged in time to blame the Holy See for a policy accommodated to its advantage and little more . 
other Catholics can bear even stronger witness respecting that papacy ' s silence . 
honourable senators , while Popes may be " infallible , " they are not perfect . 
yet no one can doubt the leadership the present Pope , Pope John Paul II , has taken in reconciling the role of the Church and the responsibility for the roots and exercise of anti - Semitism . 
he was the first Pope since the founder of the papacy , St. Peter himself , to visit a synagogue . 
he was the first Pope to visit a death camp , Auschwitz , located just 35 miles from his Polish birthplace . 
i repeat again with you , the strongest condemnation of anti - Semitism and racism , which are opposed to the principles of Christianity . 
pope John Paul II was the first Pope to establish relations between the Vatican and Israel and the first Pope to condemn anti - Semitism both repeatedly and forcefully . 
later , as a Polish Cardinal , before he ascended to St. Peter ' s throne , he even encouraged a priest to write an article criticizing Pius XII , provided that criticism was placed fairly in three contexts ; historical , psychological and moral . 
can we await a statement by the Conference of Bishops in Canada as to what role the Church in Canada had prior to , during and following World War II in the documented unhappy attitudes of some of their priests and some of their adherents ? 
may the newly appointed prince of the Church in Toronto , His Eminence Cardinal Aloysius Ambrozic , himself born in Eastern Europe and reportedly interested in Catholic education , lead the way . 
honourable senators , I see this Vatican document as a useful first step in the right direction to correct historic wrongs and accept accountability . 
i hope the Vatican will find room to go further in the future as even its adherents recommend , correcting the egregious errors of the past , perhaps moving from a " mea culpa " to a " mea maxima culpa . " 
what is the nature of the gulf separating these two friendless schools of ideas ? 
which school of ideas occupies which of St. Augustine ' s two cities remains yet to be seen . 
the least we can do , as Elie Wiesel reminded us , is to ask good questions . 
would it not be preferable that the Vatican fully open its files so that scholars can examine for themselves the historical truth of the Holocaust which , for most of us , remains beyond our imagination ? 
in the first words of Pope John Paul II ' s papacy , " be not afraid . " 
yet to study this carefully crafted document is a step , another step in achieving what His Holiness Pope John II has said and written and preached : " Never again . " 
honourable senators , may we each be granted a period of quiet and thoughtful contemplation , as once again we approach , each of us , the Passover and Easter seasons . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senators wish to speak , this inquiry will be considered debated . 
i will now leave the Chair , to return at 4:25 p.m. to await the arrival of the Deputy of His Excellency the Governor General . 
the Senate adjourned during pleasure . 
royal ASSENT 
the Right Honourable J . E . Michel Bastarache , Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Canada , in his capacity as Deputy Governor General , having come and being seated at the foot of the Throne . 
i have the honour to inform you that His Excellency the Governor General has been pleased to cause Letters Patent to be issued under his Sign Manual and Signet constituting the Honourable J . E . Michel Bastarache , Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court of Canada , his Deputy , to do in His Excellency ' s name all acts on his part necessary to be done during His Excellency ' s pleasure . 
the Commission was read by a Clerk at the Table . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to give the Royal Assent to the following bills : 
an Act respecting cooperatives ( Bill C - 5 , Chapter 1 , 1998 ) 
an Act to amend the Small Business Loans Act ( Bill C - 21 , Chapter 4 , 1998 ) 
the Honourable Ian McClelland , Acting Speaker of the House of Commons , then addressed the Honourable the Deputy Governor General as follows : 
may it please Your Honour : 
the Commons of Canada have voted certain supplies required to enable the Government to defray the expenses of the public service . 
in the name of the Commons , I present to Your Honour the following bills : 
an Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1998 ( Bill C - 33 , Chapter 2 , 1998 ) 
an Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 1998 ( Bill C - 34 , Chapter 3 , 1998 ) 
to which bills I humbly request Your Honour ' s assent . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to give the Royal Assent to the said bills . 
the House of Commons withdrew . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to retire . 
the sitting of the Senate was resumed . 
business of the Senate 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I had hoped to speak on the eleventh report of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , but I neglected to adjourn the debate . 
i am asking , with leave of the Senate , that the report be reinstated on the Orders of the Day and adjourned in my name . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , to reinstate this item on the Order Paper in the name of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I understand there are colleagues on both sides of the chamber who wish to speak to Inquiry No. 27 , which was spoken to by the Honourable Senator Grafstein just before we suspended the sitting . 
i would ask leave to have that item remain on the Order Paper , and standing adjourned in my name . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that this item be reinstated and placed in the name of the Honourable Senator Carstairs ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , April 1 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 52 
Wednesday , April 1 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the LATE M. MAXWELL COHEN , O . C . , Q . C . 
tributes 
hon. G é rald - A . 
Beaudoin : 
[ English ] 
without any doubt , Maxwell Cohen was one of the great jurists of his generation . 
he played a lead role in numerous academic , professional , and legal activities . 
last year , in August , a colloquium on the " Federalism of Tomorrow " was held at the University of Ottawa . 
the proceedings of that colloquium will be published in June . 
i wish to say that Maxwell Cohen was in good part responsible for that colloquium . 
Maxwell Cohen was a highly talented jurist . 
his was a long and glorious career . 
the Senate 
time Allocation for Debate 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , on two occasions last week I sought , and received , permission from this chamber and from all colleagues on both sides to extend my presentation in excess of the 15 minutes allowed by the rules . 
i wanted to thank honourable senators once again , and to express my gratitude for that indulgence . 
however , over the weekend it struck me that there are many issues - particularly the one with which I was dealing , namely , Senate reform - that require a great deal more than the time allowed . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in our gallery of a group of visitors . 
they are a group of 16 students accompanied by four coordinators from the Long Plain First Nations , and they are part of the Long Plain Youth for Tomorrow project . 
the group is accompanied by their coordinators Margaret Assiniboine , Mary Wichmartin , Mary Perswain and Robert France . 
i must add , of course , that they come from that great province of Manitoba . 
the Senate 
welcome to New Page 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to introduce to you the latest addition to our Senate Page Programme . 
welcome to the Senate . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
aboriginal Peoples 
first Nations Government Bill - Notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Apply Materials and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bills to Study of Current Bill 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , April 2 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples during its study of Bills S - 10 and S - 12 ( An Act providing for self - government by the First Nations of Canada ) in the 35 th Parliament be referred to the committee for its present study of Bill S - 14 . 
question PERIOD 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 25 , 1998 by the Honourable Senator Tkachuk regarding war veterans allowance programs and changes to regulations governing casual earnings . 
national Finance 
war Veterans Allowance Program - Changes to Regulations Governing Casual Earnings - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. David Tkachuk on March 25 , 1998 ) 
orders OF THE DAY 
canada - Yukon Oil and Gas Accord Implementation Bill 
third Reading 
hon. Paul Lucier moved the third reading of Bill C - 8 , respecting an accord between the Governments of Canada and the Yukon Territory relating to the administration and control of and legislative jurisdiction in respect of oil and gas . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lise Bacon , pursuant to notice given Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings on Bill C - 9 , Canada Marine Act , with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
motion agreed to . 
hon. Lise Bacon pursuant to notice of Tuesday , March 31 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays for the duration of its study of Bill C - 9 , the Canada Marine Act , even though the Senate may then be sitting and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , perhaps the mover of this motion would provide the chamber with an explanation . 
senator Bacon : 
honourable senators , given the number of witnesses we have to hear during our study of Bill C - 9 and the fact that the committee deliberations will be televised - a motion to that effect has just been agreed to - we should begin at precise times , since many people in the Maritimes are interested in this bill and want to watch the debate . 
if committee hearings start at 4:00 p.m. , it will permit people to follow the debates . 
it would then be 5:00 p.m. in the Maritimes . 
senator Kinsella : 
i thank the honourable senator for that explanation . 
this raises a very serious matter to which we have alluded on previous occasions in the recent past . 
to have a standing committee of the Senate meeting at the time when the Senate itself is sitting is contrary to our rules . 
there is a principle and there is history behind that rule which speaks to the primacy of this chamber and the work conducted in this chamber . 
i know that there are exceptional circumstances which present themselves from time to time , such as the schedule of a minister from whom a committee is very anxious to hear , or a special witness from out of town who might be available . 
however , honourable senators , if you read this motion carefully , it is a motion requesting a standing order of the house that on every Tuesday at 4:00 p.m. , for the duration of its study , this committee would be sitting even though the Senate may then be sitting . 
i believe that to be a very bad precedent . 
we do not know how long that committee will be conducting its study . 
to acquiesce to such a motion would be giving blanket permission for that committee to meet when the Senate is sitting . 
looking at the time line that is involved , they are requesting permission to meet at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays . 
there are , of course , two days of the week when , as a general rule , the Senate is not sitting , namely Mondays and Fridays . 
it would be my preference to have committees look at those two days rather than trying to squeeze into Tuesday , Wednesday and Thursday , elongated periods of time for committees to meet because there are other committees that are also meeting at those same times . 
i know there are many honourable senators who are members of several committees , and it is not uncommon that some senators are finding themselves in the awkward position of having two of the committees of which they are members sitting at the same time . 
if we allow this motion to carry , the senators who are members of that committee will be placed in the awkward position of having to decide whether to attend the committee meeting or the daily sitting of the Senate in the chamber . 
there might be an item on the Order Paper for that day that is of particular interest or importance to one of those senators , affecting his or her region . 
that whole infrastructure would be affected were we to give what effectively would be standing permission , should this motion pass . 
in any event , it seems to me that there is not much government business before us . 
today we had no debate on any government business . 
yesterday , we spent a very brief period of time on government business . 
the reality is that we are not receiving any legislation from the other place that we cannot deal with efficiently and refer to our committees . 
we are about to take the two - week break that is envisaged for the Easter period , and I would suggest that committees might sit on that third week , rather than have the chamber come back , given the paucity of legislation that we are likely to receive . 
for these and other reasons upon which I wish to reflect concerning this motion , I move the adjournment of the debate . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 53 
Thursday , April 2 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Quebec 
decision of Mr. Jean Charest to Quit Federal Politics and Run for Leadership of Quebec Liberal Party 
foreign Affairs 
visit of President and Mrs. Clinton to Africa 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
fisheries 
privatization and Licensing of Quotas in Industry - Report of Committee Requesting Authority to Travel and Engage Services Printed as Appendix and Adopted 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
third Reading 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Printed 
veterans Health Care Services 
interim Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Presented 
business of the Senate 
royal Assent Bill 
first Reading 
question PERIOD 
health 
restricted Application of Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims for Reasons of Cost - Government Position 
the Senate 
lack of Government Business - Possibility of Special Studies and Pre - Study of Bills - Government Position 
Cape Breton Development Corporation . 
participation of Leader of Government in Debate - Request for Tabling of Auditor General ' s Report - Government Position . 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Farm Credit Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Points of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
referred to Committee 
transport and Communication 
motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sittings of the Senate - Order Withdrawn 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Adjourned 
aboriginal Peoples 
first Nations Government Bill - Committee Authorized to Apply Materials and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bills to Study of Current Bill 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
the SENATE 
Thursday , April 2 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Quebec 
decision of Mr. Jean Charest to Quit Federal Politics and Run for Leadership of Quebec Liberal Party 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i must admit , honourable senators , that I have mixed feelings about his decision . 
on the one hand , as a resident of Quebec and a daily witness to the devastating effects of certain policies of a government that is devoted to the task of breaking this country apart , I am delighted that a politician whose federalist sentiment is totally without question is announcing his readiness to face up to those in power there , thus offering the people of Quebec a choice that could not be any clearer . 
on the other hand , as a close associate , a fellow parliamentarian and an active member of the party that Jean Charest has led , with determination , enthusiasm and tremendous energy , for nearly four and - a - half years under the most difficult circumstances , I do not hide my sadness at his leaving , for its impact on the caucus and the party is not negligible . 
however , today is not a day to indulge in anything but sentiments of pride that our party , whose commitment to the Canadian federation goes back to well before 1867 , has produced a leader whose loyalty to his country is recognized everywhere and whose commitment to his province is a source of extreme satisfaction to the overwhelming majority of Quebecers . 
some of the expectations raised by Jean Charest ' s decision are excessive and unrealistic . 
nonetheless , great hopes rest on his meeting this new challenge , and I have no doubt that they will be met . 
canada is privileged to have Jean Charest accept a most difficult task and , in time , Canada will owe him a great debt of gratitude . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , several years ago , I had the pleasure of sitting next to the Honourable Jean Charest on a return flight to Ottawa from Lahr , Germany . 
we talked about many things : the world , our country , his province , and our respective parties . 
it was a very enlightening and pleasant conversation . 
at one point , I said , " One day , your time will come to lead your party . " 
as I recall , he chuckled at that suggestion . 
i believe it was the following year , 1993 , that the Conservative leadership convention was called . 
Mr. Charest was being urged by his supporters to enter the contest . 
i hesitantly asked , " Do you think it would help if I gave him a call ? " 
the answer came back very much in the affirmative . 
i asked because I believe that a legitimate Conservative party is very important to this country . 
he said , " Senator , " and I said , " Minister . " 
i said , " Do you recall , about 12 months ago , our trip back from Europe ? " 
he said , " Yes , I do . " 
i asked him if he remembered what I had said at that time , and he said that he did . 
i said , " Well , I hope you make up your mind in the affirmative with respect to the major decision you are about to make , because , in my mind , you owe it to your party , to your country , to your province and to yourself . " 
i suppose there would be those who , knowing my partisanship , would think that that might be an immediate turn - off . 
however , he thanked me in the courteous way in which I have always been treated by Jean Charest . 
the question was referred by the Prime Minister to St é phane Dion . 
however , at the same time , I know that it reflected the view of those in the room about the step that Jean Charest was about to take , and the support for that decision . 
i do not think it is necessary for me to take the time of this chamber to enunciate the many qualifications of Mr. Charest . 
i will simply say that he is the right person in the right place at the appropriate time , and we all wish him well . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I will follow in the same vein as the kind remarks just made by the Leader of the Government in the Senate with regard to the very difficult decision that Mr. Charest has made in the best interests of Canada , in my opinion . 
i had occasion , last week , to echo the intent of the remarks made by the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs at the National Liberal Convention , which Senator Graham has repeated here . 
i would repeat that we all subscribe to the principle that country comes first , notwithstanding any circumstance . 
my comment at that time was that what is really important is to " walk the walk " and not just " talk the talk . " 
that comment was made not out of bitterness but out of an immense sense of pride that the leader of our party , in announcing his decision , would speak , first and foremost , to the unity of Canada . 
the tremendous sacrifice that Progressive Conservatives in Parliament have made in losing such a dynamic , visionary , creative and young leader is generally recognized . 
we are committed to putting our collective shoulder to the common wheel for the invigoration of the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada in the interests of building a strong parliamentary system within our country . 
while we as a party are aware of the tremendous sacrifice that we are making , nevertheless , the decision of our national leader is one that we support . 
we join our colleagues opposite in extending to him every encouragement , and our best wishes for success , for his resolution speaks to a common goal , namely the unity and the future of one of the greatest countries in the world . 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I do not have a prepared text . 
i will let my heart and my head do the talking . 
i understand my colleagues opposite are having a hard time coming to terms with the departure of their leader . 
i have faced the same problem on a number of occasions . 
there are times when decisions have to be made . 
i am delighted Mr. Charest made this decision . 
i was somewhat biased at the time , but now I am totally open . 
on the weekend , I met a lot of people . 
something extraordinary is happening in Quebec with the arrival of Mr. Charest . 
i want to say that to the people in this house and especially to those opposite to help them accept the sacrifice being asked of them . 
the young and the not so young in Quebec are wanting to be involved in Quebec politics and are looking for change . 
the latter is finding expression in the person of Mr. Charest . 
i must say that never before have I seen so many people so enthusiastic about discussing politics in a positive way . 
jean Charest ' s message is a positive one . 
he will be bringing the positive to Quebec after so many years of negativism . 
those interested in Quebec ' s sovereignty have been dishing out negative speeches for 30 years . 
and God knows that for 16 of them I had to oppose these people . 
i know what that involves . 
the wind of change blowing over Quebecers will , most importantly , bring hope to young Quebecers . 
this hope is often what enables us to live , and Mr. Charest is the bearer of this hope . 
he will help us work together for complete change by the next provincial election , which will permit us finally to have a united and positive country turned toward the future . 
he will not limit himself to looking back at the past . 
the government team in Quebec is tired and worn out . 
it is time for a new , revitalized team with a strong and vigorous leader , who almost has the wisdom of experience . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , Jean Charest has had an outstanding career spread over 14 years in the Parliament of Canada . 
his career is well documented . 
member of Parliament for Sherbrooke since 1984 , he was made a minister at a very young age in 1986 . 
he ran in the leadership race to succeed Prime Minister Mulroney in 1993 and came in a very close second to the Honourable Kim Campbell , who was Prime Minister of Canada from June 25 to November 4 , 1993 , during which time Jean Charest became Deputy Prime Minister . 
in the federal election of October 25 , 1993 , Jean Charest and Elsie Wayne were the only Convervatives elected . 
as the leader of the Conservative Party , Jean Charest showed extraordinary courage in rebuilding our party , which won 20 seats in the 1997 election . 
as a result , the Conservative Party , whose foundation predates the 1867 Confederation , regained its status as an official party . 
in the Senate , it was the official opposition . 
jean Charest recognized the great importance of the Senate . 
we had a very good relationship with him . 
and we are grateful to him today . 
i may be young , but valour 
is never a matter of years . 
after thinking about it for three weeks , Jean Charest chose to trade political arenas and run for the leadership of the Quebec Liberal Party . 
in my opinion , this was destiny calling . 
we owe a great deal to Jean Charest . 
we wish him the best of luck in his new career ; he deserves it . 
to conclude , we are going through some very difficult times . 
there are currently two opposite poles : the federalists versus the sovereignists . 
we federalists must work together for our country . 
that is what Jean Charest is doing right now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the 15 - minute period for Senators ' Statements has expired . 
would it be agreeable to hear from Senator Corbin as well ? 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I also wished to make a statement . 
however , I saw so many colleagues rise that I held back . 
perhaps the courtesy could be extended . 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
i will not proceed with my remarks at this time . 
i would prefer to listen to the other tributes to Jean Charest . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that the Honourable Senator Corbin be allowed to speak at this time ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
foreign Affairs 
visit of President and Mrs. Clinton to Africa 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , there was a momentous event in Africa this past week due to the presence there of the President of the United States of America . 
this was very much a first and an important one . 
in the course of their visits to a number of states , President Clinton and his wife wanted to make up for past history , up to a point . 
however , there is another message in that visit , and one that very much concerns Canada . 
in my opinion and that of others with whom I have spoken over the months and years , in the post - colonial period , France and former masters of former colonies have not always played the serious role that has been expected of them . 
they were more involved in intrigue than in real , honest help ; more involved in self - interest for the mother country than in helping out these growing nations and democracies . 
i think what President Clinton brought to Africa this week is a very clear message in favour of democracy . 
we sometimes question the presence of the Americans in foreign affairs and the way they handle certain matters . 
it is a grand opportunity . 
it is also an opportunity for Canada to reassess its aid programs to countries such as these emerging democracies in Africa . 
honourable senators , I suggest we reflect deeply on the events of the past week because if we want the world to continue to strive for peace and equality of opportunity , we must mend our ways . 
we have to do it , and I am very glad that the United States of America has decided to become more involved . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
fisheries 
privatization and Licensing of Quotas in Industry - Report of Committee Requesting Authority to Travel and Engage Services Printed as Appendix and Adopted 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries , presented the following report : 
Thursday , April 2 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Wednesday , November 19 , 1997 to examine and report on the questions of privatization and quota licensing in Canada ' s fisheries , respectfully requests that it be empowered to designate one or more members of the committee and / or such staff as may be necessary to travel in Canada or abroad on a fact - finding mission on behalf of the committee ; and that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration and the report thereon of that Committee are appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
GERALD J . COMEAU 
chairman 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate , appendix p . 585 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Comeau : 
hon. Senators : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
hon. Lorna Milne , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , presented the following report : 
Thursday , April 2 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs has the honour to present its 
seventh REPORT 
your committee , to which was referred Bill C - 18 , An Act to amend the Customs Act and the Criminal Code , has , in obedience to the Order of Reference of Wednesday , February 18 , 1998 , examined the said Bill and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
third Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Printed 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the sixth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications on Bill S - 2 , an Act to amend the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act and to make a consequential amendment to another act . 
i ask that the report be printed in the Journals of the Senate of this day . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate , p . 575 . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Bacon , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
veterans Health Care Services 
interim Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Presented 
hon. Lowell Murray , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , presented the following report : 
Thursday , April 2 , 1998 
the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology has the honour to present its 
fourth REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized to examine and report on the state of health care in Canada concerning veterans of war and Canadian Service persons ; and that the study concern itself with the availability , quality and standards of health care available to those veterans and Service persons has , in obedience to its Order of Reference of November 5 , 1997 , proceeded to that inquiry and now presents its Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs ' interim report entitled , The State of Health Care for War Veterans and Service Men and Women - First Report : 
long - term care , standards of care and federal - provincial relations - Case Studies : 
Sunnybrook Health Science Centre , Toronto ; Ste Anne ' s Hospital , Ste Anne de Bellevue , Quebec . 
respectfully submitted , 
on motion of Senator Murray , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
business of the Senate 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I ask that Government Notices of Motions be deferred until later this day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is that agreed ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
for what purpose would we want to delay this item ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , there are negotiations ongoing between this side and the other side . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
on what subject ? 
what are we talking about ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that this item be deferred until later this day ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
royal Assent Bill 
first Reading 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to introduce for first reading Bill S - 15 , respecting the declaration of Royal Assent by the Governor General in the Queen ' s name to bills passed by the Houses of Parliament . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , April 21 , 1998 . 
question PERIOD 
health 
restricted Application of Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims for Reasons of Cost - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it is the continuation of a question I asked him two days ago dealing with hepatitis C . You will recall that I stated that the decision to limit compensation to an estimated 22,000 individuals infected with hepatitis C between 1986 and 1990 was an accounting decision and not one based on humanitarian measures . 
the Leader of the Government replied , in part : 
... it is really a question of talking about periods of time . 
honourable senators , it has been reported in the media recently that those infected before 1986 are estimated to number between 50,000 and 60,000 . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate admit that the real reason compensation was not awarded to these individuals is that the actual cost would be close to $ 1.1 billion Canadian ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Oliver : 
No. 
senator Graham : 
that is exactly the amount that is being allocated for those infected with hepatitis C : $ 800 million from the Government of Canada and an additional $ 300 million from the provinces . 
senator Oliver : 
what about the additional 50,000 to 60,000 people who were infected before 1986 ? 
would that not cost an additional $ 1.1 billion ? 
if so , is that the reason for excluding them ? 
senator Graham : 
no , honourable senators . 
how tragic this is . 
in these tragic circumstances , it is rather ironic that the honourable senator has come up with the exact same figure as it will cost to compensate those infected between 1986 and 1990 . 
he refers to those people infected in the period prior to 1986 and suggests that they number in the order of 50,000 . 
as I have said , all the ministers of health have carefully reviewed the situation of persons infected with hepatitis C between 1986 and 1990 . 
these are indeed very sad circumstances . 
i understand that a new class action suit has been filed in Quebec Superior Court on behalf of persons infected with hepatitis C before January 1 , 1986 and after June 30 of 1990 . 
under the circumstances , I believe it would be inappropriate for me to comment further . 
the Senate 
lack of Government Business - Possibility of Special Studies and Pre - Study of Bills - Government Position 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the leadership on the other side of the house continues to deny an inquiry into the Somalia affair and refuses to consider pre - study for bills . 
yet , yesterday the Senate sat for 20 minutes because there was so little on the agenda . 
since the leadership on the other side continues to insist that we have sittings such as that of yesterday , would it not be a more valuable use of our time to take on such things as pre - studies and Somalia - type inquiries ? 
you certainly cannot say that we do not have the time . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my honourable friend raises a valid point . 
yesterday was a rather unusual day , particularly since there was not a Question Period . 
i do not know if that was an April Fool ' s gift to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , or done merely for what might be termed charitable reasons . 
senator Comeau has raised an interesting point with respect to pre - study . 
either negotiations broke down or we found a solution to the problem . 
it is not a solution that we write off entirely . 
if my honourable friend has any specific suggestions in that regard , we would be happy to entertain them , recognizing at the same time that it is open to any senator to institute an inquiry of his or her choice . 
senator Comeau : 
since the Leader of the Government in the Senate is being quite generous on the question of pre - study , perhaps we can consider Somalia as an area for study ? 
senator Graham : 
that is something that would have to be examined by the chamber as a whole . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , building on the exchange which has just occurred , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate share with us his view on the success , in the government ' s estimation , of the process of introducing government legislation first here in the Senate ? 
one bill I can think of - and no doubt there are others - has moved rather expeditiously to serious study in one of our standing committees . 
indeed , I read the Hansard in the other place on one bill that had been initiated here in the Senate , and lo and behold , a member of the New Democratic Party in the other place was praising the Senate for its work . 
i do know that the government has faced some criticism by the reactionaries in the other place . 
i trust that the government is not intimidated by those in the Reform Party who do not understand our parliamentary history . 
would the Leader of the Government share with us his view - or the government ' s view - on what I believe to be an excellent initiative of introducing government business here in the Senate ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am glad that the Honourable Senator Kinsella has raised this particular point . 
as he knows , Bill S - 2 was reported here today . 
we have already passed Bill S - 3 , Bill S - 4 , Bill S - 9 and Bill S - 5 . 
i understand that Bill S - 4 is about to be considered in its final stages in the other place . 
i have also had discussions with Minister Boudria , the Leader of the Government in the other place , concerning other bills that might be introduced in the Senate chamber . 
we anticipate new legislation in the very near future . 
my colleagues in cabinet have recognized that this as a very appropriate procedure , and we can anticipate further work . 
Cape Breton Development Corporation . 
participation of Leader of Government in Debate - Request for Tabling of Auditor General ' s Report - Government Position . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , may I ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate whether he will take the occasion of a debate , which is now adjourned in the name of Senator Bryden , on the report of the Special Senate Committee on the Cape Breton Development Corporation to make a full statement to the Senate within the next few days ? 
there are seven days left on the debate . 
will he make a statement on the state of affairs at that corporation , which , as he knows , has been facing many unforeseen problems in recent months ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would be very pleased to undertake to make as complete a report as I can on the situation of the Cape Breton Development Corporation . 
my honourable friend Senator Murray is very close to that situation , and knowledgeable about the problems faced by the corporation , most particularly at Phalen colliery . 
i should mention that Devco has provided the minister responsible , Mr. Goodale , with its operating and capital budgets for the 1998 - 99 period which outline projections for the coming year . 
i anticipate that , in the coming months , that projection will be tabled in the house . 
i would be quite happy to bring as complete a statement as I possibly can at a very early date . 
senator Murray : 
i appreciate that undertaking on the part of the minister . 
at the same time , could I ask him whether he would attempt to obtain a copy of the special examination of Devco recently completed by the Auditor General of Canada ? 
the minister will recall that the report of the previous special examination , conducted in the early 1990 s , was made available to a previous Senate committee . 
senator Graham : 
yes , I will give that undertaking . 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Farm Credit Corporation - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 90 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Industry Responsibility Bill 
second Reading - Points of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
on the Order : 
motion of the Honourable Senator Kenny , seconded by the Honourable Senator Nolin , for the second reading of Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsiblity Foundation . - ( 
speaker ' s Ruling ) . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , on Tuesday , March 17 , I stated that I would take under advisement the important points of order that had been raised with respect to Bill S - 13 , to incorporate and to establish an industry levy to provide for the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsibility Foundation . 
arguments were presented by several senators , and three separate documents were presented by Senator Kenny . 
on March 25 , with leave of the Senate , Senator Kinsella raised another question regarding the procedural acceptability of this bill . 
he asked the Chair to consider whether this bill might in fact be a private bill rather than a public one . 
i have reviewed all the statements made by senators who participated in the discussion on the point of order , studied the documents that were tabled and examined the bill itself . 
i am now prepared to rule on the point of order . 
there are two fundamental questions that were first raised with respect to Bill S - 13 on March 17 . 
the first has to do with the possibility that the bill requires a Royal Recommendation . 
the second is whether the levy described in the bill is , in fact , a tax . 
if the answer to either of these questions is affirmative , that the bill does require a Royal Recommendation or that the bill does impose a tax , then this so - called " money bill " would not properly be before the Senate , since such a bill must originate in the House of Commons . 
under such circumstances , the order for second reading of the bill would have to be discharged and the bill itself dropped from the Order Paper . 
in order to determine the answers to these questions , it is necessary to review the basic arguments . 
senator Lynch - Staunton , who brought this matter to the attention of the Senate when Bill S - 13 was called for second reading , took no position on the matter . 
he raised the question simply for the purpose of clarification asking whether Bill S - 13 was a money bill . 
a similar motive seems to have prompted Senator Stollery to rise on a point of order after the second reading of the bill was formally moved . 
in presenting his case , Senator Stollery pointed to the obvious financial implications of the bill and suggested that this bill may indeed be a money bill . 
after citing sections 53 and 54 of the Constitution Act , 1867 as well as rule 81 of the Rules of the Senate , the senator noted that the bill appears to authorise the collection of money that is to be spent in pursuit of a public purpose . 
if such an assessment were accurate , the bill , in Senator Stollery ' s words : 
... must be introduced in the House of Commons by a minister , not in the Senate by a private member . 
speaking on behalf of the bill ' s procedural acceptability , Senator Kenny began by stating simply that Bill S - 13 is not a money bill . 
he claimed that the financial provisions of the bill " do not appropriate any part of the public revenue and do not impose a tax . " 
he also cited a clause which states explicitly that the corporation is not an agent of the Crown , and its funds are not public funds . 
as to whether the levy is a tax , Senator Kenny explained that , based on relevant citations of the 21 st edition of Erskine May Parliamentary Practice , the levy described in the bill is not a tax , and as such is exempt from normal financial procedures including , presumably , the obligation to have this bill considered first in the House of Commons before the Senate . 
this is because , as he stated , the levy is being imposed exclusively on the tobacco industry and in pursuit of its own purposes even though there is a public benefit as well . 
in addition , he sought to buttress his case with references to legal opinions which concluded that the levy described in the bill was not a tax . 
since it did not have as its primary purpose the collection of revenue for government purposes and because the levy was part of a regulatory scheme , the money collected through this bill was not a tax . 
after Senator Kenny had spoken , several other senators made some comments . 
senator Kinsella attempted to find out if the government had a position on this bill . 
this theme was subsequently raised again by Senator Murray after Senator Carstairs explained that because the bill was not sponsored by the government , it had taken no position on it . 
instead , she said that the government was prepared to await the Speaker ' s decision . 
speaking immediately after Senator Murray , Senator Gigant è s suggested that the Senate should be more confident in exercising its own powers . 
finally , Senator Stewart maintained that the real question , in fact the only question , was whether the levy involves a tax or impost . 
as he put it , " If it is a tax or impost , it is out of order here . 
if it is not a tax or an impost , the question of a Royal Recommendation for an appropriation does not arise . " 
a week after the point of order was originally raised , Senator Kinsella obtained the leave of the Senate to reopen the matter in order to ask another question with respect to the procedural acceptability of Bill S - 13 . 
his question concerned whether this bill was a private bill or a public one . 
in stating his case , he noted that the corporation established by this bill was for the benefit of the tobacco industry . 
this being so , he then wondered if perhaps the industry should be petitioning for this bill , a required preliminary to the introduction of any private bill . 
he then referred to the four criteria listed in Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules and Forms used to assess whether a bill should be viewed as private or public and suggested that the Chair take them into consideration . 
senator Kinsella also took note of the fact that the bill conferred on the corporation certain powers , including the power to collect levies . 
without reaching a firm conclusion , he indicated that he was suspicious that this bill is more in the nature of a private bill . 
i want to thank all honourable senators who contributed their views to this point of order . 
as I already stated , I have taken the opportunity to review the arguments , the tabled documents and the bill itself since the point of order was first raised March 17 . 
let me begin with this general proposition . 
it is my view that matters are presumed to be in order , except where the contrary is clearly established to be the case . 
this presumption suggests to me that the best policy for a speaker is to interpret the rules in favour of debate by senators , except where the matter to be debated is clearly out of order . 
addressing first the question that was raised by Senator Kinsella asking if Bill S - 13 should be viewed as a private bill rather than a public one , I have taken his advice and looked closely at the four criteria spelled out in the sixth edition of Beauchesne at citation 1055 . 
in addition , I have carefully reviewed the bill in light of the standard definition of a private bill . 
Beauchesne , in words closely based on Erskine May , states , at citation 1053 , that : 
private legislation is legislation of a special kind for conferring particular powers or benefits on any person or body of persons , including individuals and private corporations , in excess of or in conflict with the general law . 
proceedings on a private bill are initiated by a petition solicited by the parties interested in promoting the bill . 
in this case , Senator Kinsella has suggested that , if this bill is indeed a private bill , it would be out of order since it was not introduced into the Senate through a petition . 
if , on the other hand , it is a public bill , no petition would be necessary . 
senator Kinsella identifies the possible petitioners as the " tobacco industry . " 
he does not , however , identify the individuals or corporations who should be the petitioners for the tobacco industry . 
nor does the bill define the tobacco industry or specify who are its members . 
whatever the precise identity of the tobacco industry , the first question that must be decided is whether Bill S - 13 is a private bill or a public bill . 
looking at the four criteria which would determine whether a private bill should be handled as a public bill , I am struck by two of the criteria which lead me to believe that Bill S - 13 is properly a public bill . 
the first is the fact that the objects of the bill affect public policy . 
while it cannot be denied that the language of the bill highlights industry benefits , it is equally true that public policy is very much served by the bill insofar as it is aimed at the reduction of smoking by young people as is stated in subsection 3 ( 2 ) of the bill . 
as well , the magnitude of the area covered by the bill and the multiplicity of the interests involved , which is the third criterion listed in Beauchesne , suggest to me that the bill is a public bill . 
in the absence of any compelling reasons to assess the bill any other way , I am satisfied that Bill S - 13 can proceed as a public bill . 
taking the first question that was raised on March 17 , does the bill require a Royal Recommendation , I must conclude that it does not . 
the fundamental purpose of the requirement for a Royal Recommendation is to limit the authority for appropriating money from the Consolidated Revenue Fund to the Government . 
only Ministers can obtain the necessary approval from the Governor General for a Royal Recommendation to appropriate these funds . 
the Constitution stipulates that bills requiring or possessing a Royal Recommendation must originate in the House of Commons , a requirement enforced through rule 81 of the Senate . 
with respect to Bill S - 13 , the money raised through the levy is to be collected by the Canadian Tobacco Industry Community Responsibility Foundation or its agent . 
the Foundation also disposes of the funds raised in the manner and for the purposes spelled out in the bill . 
while section 2 of the Financial Administration Act defines " public money " in part as " all money belonging to Canada , " clause 33 ( 1 ) of the bill expressly states that " the Foundation is not an agent of Her Majesty and its funds are not public funds of Canada . " 
moreover , no part of the bill suggests that any money need be appropriated from the CRF in order to implement any aspect of this bill . 
therefore , I can see no requirement for a Royal Recommendation for this bill . 
citation 168 ( 5 ) of Beauchesne states that " The Speaker will not give a decision upon a constitutional question nor decide a question of law , though the same may be raised on a point of order or question of privilege . " 
what is within my authority , however , is the examination of the bill , in order to assess what it declares itself to be . 
i accepted the plain and ordinary meaning of its words and studied them to see if all the clauses relevant to the issue of the levy were internally consistent . 
i then measured the levy described in the bill against the criteria Erskine May sets out at pages 730 - 737 for identifying levies that are exempt from financial procedures governing the imposition of taxes . 
with respect to the matter of the plain language of the bill , it speaks in terms of a levy rather than a tax . 
this is evident from Part II of the bill . 
it is also clear that the levy is imposed upon the tobacco industry alone . 
the purpose of the levy , as stated in the bill , is to meet an industry purpose beneficial to it , although this industry purpose also has public benefit . 
clause 3 states categorically that the purpose of the bill is : 
... to enable and assist the Canadian tobacco industry to carry out its publicly - stated objective of reducing the use of tobacco products by young persons throughout Canada ... 
the levy is imposed exclusively on tobacco products of whatever description and is to be spent in pursuit of the goals listed in clause 5 . Consequently , with respect to the language of the bill , I must accept that what is proposed is a levy , not a tax . 
Erskine May describes two criteria by which a bill proposing a levy is exempt from the financial procedures , including the adoption of a Ways and Means resolution that would normally apply to bills imposing a tax . 
the first criterion is that the levy must be for industry purposes . 
the second is that the funds collected must not form any part of government revenue . 
Erskine May includes examples of bills which were regarded as levies as well as those which failed to meet either or both of these two criteria . 
some of these examples are of relatively recent date , suggesting that the criteria remain applicable in modern British practice . 
more important , they also seem to be applicable in Canadian practice . 
Beauchesne , at citation 980 ( 1 ) , states that " a Ways and Means motion is a necessary preliminary to the imposition of a new tax . " 
it is a corollary to the principle behind the Royal Recommendation in that it requires a sanction of the Crown to provide the revenue that may be appropriated for public purposes at a future date . 
once a Ways and Means motion has been proposed and subsequently adopted , it becomes a Ways and Means Resolution . 
following the adoption of this resolution , a bill is introduced based on its provisions , given first reading , printed , and ordered for second reading at the next sitting of the house . 
in Canadian practice , based on the British model , any bill proposing to introduce a new tax must be proceeded by a Ways and Means motion . 
without it , any charge proposed in a bill would not be identified as a tax . 
bill C - 32 , An Act to amend the Copyright Act , passed by the previous Parliament , was mentioned by Senator Kenny when he presented his case on this point of order . 
certain provisions of Bill C - 32 , a government bill , imposed a levy on the sale of blank tapes to be distributed to artists and artist groups as a form of royalty . 
there is further evidence that the levy was not viewed as a tax . 
i say this because , so far as I have been able to determine , the bill was not preceded by a Ways and Means resolution , which would have been a prerequisite if the funds had been viewed as a tax . 
applying the criteria explained in Erskine May , and based on the model of the Bill C - 32 , I can only determine that the levy proposed in Bill S - 13 is not a tax from a procedural point of view . 
consequently , the bill is not subject to the usual financial procedures that would require it to be considered first in the other place . 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , in light of the - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have verified whether , under the rules , the Honourable Senator Kenny is considered to have spoken on the bill , and , therefore , whether any further remarks by him would be considered as closing the debate . 
he is in order , and he may proceed . 
senator Kenny : 
your Honour , it is my understanding that this is the first opportunity to speak on the bill . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
that is true , because the point of order was raised before you could speak . 
senator Kenny : 
honourable senators , I should like to take this opportunity to explain and describe this bill to members of this house . 
while we are thinking about that , I would ask honourable senators to keep a couple of points in mind . 
right now , it spends $ 20 million per year in combating tobacco - related diseases . 
about $ 10 million of that amount is for enforcement , which is basically helping corner store operators determine the difference between a 17 - year - old and an 18 - year - old ; and $ 10 million is spent on educational programs to help young people understand the dangers of tobacco . 
it is that disproportionality that I wish to draw to the attention of the house : about $ 2,000 million is being taken in by the government and $ 20 million is being spent by the government to combat the problem . 
the second disproportionality that I wish to bring to the attention of senators is the fact that 40,000 Canadians die every year from tobacco . 
that forms the largest number of Canadians to die from a preventable disease . 
the next highest cause of preventable death in Canada is traffic accidents , which includes drunk driving . 
about 4,000 Canadians die tragically each year either from drunk driving or from driving accidents . 
there are 40,000 in the first category , and then you have the drop all the way down to 4,000 for the second one . 
the problem of smoking - related diseases and smoking - related deaths is 10 times greater than the next closest cause of preventable death . 
this is our most serious problem and one that we must confront . 
in the six years of World War II , the Germans only managed to kill 43,000 Canadian soldiers . 
however , this year , last year and next year , 40,000 Canadians will die because of somebody ' s marketing plan ; 40,000 Canadians will die because of tobacco - related diseases . 
it does not make sense . 
this is an incredible outpouring of our resources . 
honourable senators should be conscious of the $ 10 billion that is being spent because of tobacco - related diseases , and of the 40,000 families that are destroyed as a result of tobacco - related diseases . 
when a family member dies , whether of tobacco or otherwise , families must be totally restructured . 
there is no other issue that kills so many of our fellow Canadians year after year , and very little is done about it . 
with that in mind , I would draw honourable senators ' attention to a loose - leaf binder which has been made available . 
it will assist in the brief description I intend to give of the bill . 
tab 1 describes the bill briefly , and I will come back to it in a moment . 
tab 2 indicates the coverage that the bill has received to date , and there has been broad and wide support across the country . 
tab 3 reflects endorsements from different health organizations , and needs a bit of qualification . 
what must be understood is that this is not just general correspondence that my office has received . 
if you thumb through it , you will see correspondence from coast to coast to coast , all writing in favour of this proposal . 
i encourage honourable senators to look through the correspondence to see the names of some of the people who have come forward . 
they include representatives of labour unions , medical officers of health and public health nurses . 
people from the entire spectrum of the health community have come forward to endorse this bill . 
you will see a large number of endorsements from the Canadian Cancer Society . 
i feel obliged to tell you that these are not duplicates . 
the Canadian Cancer Society operates as an independent federation and each subdivision of it forms its own decisions about what legislation it chooses to support . 
it is not determined nationally by a single head office or by a single convention . 
each unit of the Canadian Cancer Society decides for itself whether it wants to go ahead and support legislation of this nature . 
i also see submissions from the Ontario Campaign for Action on Tobacco . 
if this house looks with favour on this bill , it will be a step in the right direction , one of many steps to come and , therefore , something worthwhile for us to do . 
having said that it is not a panacea , let me tell you why the bill is before you . 
the bill is before you because Bill C - 71 had two fundamental faults . 
there were two serious omissions in the Tobacco Act that was enacted last year . 
the first is that there is no funding for young people to get them not to smoke , or to help them cease smoking . 
there is no provision for additional funding for that cause . 
in the last fiscal year that ended a couple of days ago , the federal government was providing $ 10 million per year : $ 5 million for enforcement and $ 5 million for education . 
for the next five fiscal years , they have promised to increase that to $ 20 million : $ 10 million for enforcement and $ 10 million for education . 
however , this is a drop in the bucket ; this is a miniscule amount . 
given the size of the problem , given the amount of money they are collecting - the two thousand million dollars - and given the impact it is having . 
the first serious omission was that there was nothing in the bill to affect young people . 
why is it important that we approach young people ? 
why not approach someone who is 45 ? 
why not approach a smoker who is older ? 
the key reason for focusing on young people is that young people are the ones currently making the decision on whether to smoke or not to smoke . 
thirty per cent of Canadians between the ages of 15 and 19 are choosing to smoke . 
he did not say they lit up a cigarette and started smoking at six , but he said that at about the age of six , they are watching their parents , television and society , and they are concluding that that is how adults behave . 
the critical ages , I am told , are around 10 , 11 , 12 and 13 . 
those of you who were members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs last year heard the expert witnesses who came before us explain that there are a wide variety of reasons why young people choose to smoke . 
some do it because they are emulating someone they admire . 
perhaps it is Jacques Villeneuve getting out of a racing car . 
you can see the picture now . 
he has just won a race , and he is perspiring . 
he has his new , blond - coloured hair . 
right across his chest appears the name of a cigarette company , and right across the front of his helmet appears the name of a cigarette company . 
the experts who appeared before the Legal Committee last year talked about kids who are feeling peer pressure in their schools . 
" if you want to be part of our group , our group smokes , so you had better smoke too . 
if you want to be cool because we are cool , you had better smoke too . " 
the messages we received from the experts who testified before the committee are true . 
i have tested them . 
in fact , I sat on gym floors talking to young people . 
after the first 15 or 20 minutes , they start telling you things . 
they will tell you where you can get cigarettes under age . 
they will tell you that the guys over in the corner are the cool group , and you cannot be part of them if you do not smoke . 
they will tell you about the pressure they feel if they are not part of the gang . 
we also had experts tell us that young people smoke just because their parents tell them not to . 
dad says black , son says white ; dad says white , son says black . 
most senators in this chamber are parents . 
even those who are not parents are familiar with adolescents . 
we all know how difficult it is to get a young person to even hang up a shirt . 
the sort of chemistry going on amongst adolescents at this crucial time leads them to rebel , leads them to search for their identify , and leads them towards things that appear attractive to movie stars , or that are endorsed by sports heroes . 
that is how young people are coerced into smoking . 
the last motivator has to do with young women . 
over the past few years there has been an alarming increase in the number of young women who are smoking . 
the principal reason is that they have come to the conclusion that they will stay thin if they smoke . 
check it out . 
young girls aged 13 , 14 and 15 take a look at their role models . 
they look at the magazines designed for young people . 
all of the models are shaped like toothpicks , and they have concluded that if you are to be attractive in this world , you have to be thin . 
it speeds up your metabolism ; it helps deal with putting something in your mouth . 
if you are not putting a candy in your mouth , it is a cigarette , and there are no calories in cigarettes . 
check it out . 
if you talk to a group of young women and spend time with them , they will tell you that one of the main reasons they smoke is that they think they will look more attractive . 
they think they will be thin because they are smoking . 
honourable senators , what am I trying to say ? 
i am trying to say that the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee last year heard a series of witnesses describe in great detail , and far more lucidly than I , that there are a variety of reasons why adolescents choose to smoke . 
in Canada , 80 per cent of Canadians make the decision whether or not to smoke before the age of 18 . 
this is why it is so important that we concentrate on this young group : catch them at that age , and find ways to communicate with them . 
what did the experts tell us after they described the different reasons why young people smoke ? 
they told us that there is no one solution . 
there is no one answer to solve the problem . 
what we need are a variety of programs that will attack the problem of young people smoking . 
if they are smoking for different reasons , then we have to find different ways to communicate with them . 
yes , they were in favour of national programs , or in - your - face advertising , if you will . 
yes , they thought there was some point in having regional programs . 
they stressed most strongly local programs in the community through which local people could deal with the problems themselves . 
they stressed getting programs going schools , YM - YWCAs , youth clubs , churches and on the streets . 
they said that their biggest problem was funding . 
they said that acquiring a few dollars here and a few dollars there would make a great difference . 
i met with a group in Vancouver called Clean Air . 
they operate on a budget of less than $ 5,000 a year . 
they work on keeping bars and restaurants smoke - free . 
they have all sorts of plans for how they could be more effective if they had another $ 5,000 a year . 
i have been to high schools in New Brunswick which have anti - smoking programs . 
they said that they needed only $ 2,000 to make their programs really effective . 
no one starts to smoke at 27 , 34 or 45 years of age . 
people start to smoke when they are adolescents . 
this is our opportunity to correct that deficiency in the Tobacco Act by setting up a foundation which will provide funding so that these programs can get started at the local level . 
the second deficiency in Bill C - 71 was that , as of next October , it cut off all the promotion that was dependent upon cigarette money . 
i have a list of over 280 organizations that are dependent on tobacco money . 
none of these groups have , as yet , had time to find alternate sponsors . 
they have not had enough time to find sponsors to replace the tobacco company money . 
i know that many people in this room have been involved in fund - raising . 
in fact , it is astonishing how many senators are involved in helping with projects in their local communities . 
those of you who have been involved in fund - raising know that you cannot just knock on someone ' s door and expect them to sign a cheque right away . 
it takes time to build relationships ; it takes time to demonstrate to the donor that your project is worthwhile . 
in the case of commercial organizations , it takes time for the commercial organizations to understand that becoming a sponsor of your group fits in with the image their company needs . 
this bill gives those groups that have been dependent upon tobacco money five years to find alternative sponsors . 
that is intended to deal with the second deficiency in Bill C - 71 . 
however , the five years is not a straight giveaway . 
i ask you to turn to Tab 1 , page 3 , of your book where there is a chart which shows where and how the money goes . 
the bill calls for a 50 - cent levy on each carton of cigarettes . 
fifty cents on each carton will generate $ 120 million a year . 
the plan calls for $ 60 million to be deposited in a youth education fund in the first year . 
that is the program I spoke about that could be national , regional or local . 
we hope that its emphasis will be local . 
the second $ 50 million is to go to an arts and sports transitional fund . 
that is for the groups that are currently dependent upon tobacco money and have no means to replace it . 
without replacement , these organizations will die . 
they are an important part of the cultural fabric of Canada ; they are an important part of how this country entertains itself , and they do not have enough time to find replacement money . 
you will notice that in the first year they get $ 50 million and that the amount decreases by 20 per cent each year for five years . 
after five years , funding is cut off . 
it is a transitional fund designed to give such organizations time to find other sponsors . 
it is also designed to push . 
there is no point in giving these groups the same amount of money they have had all along . 
that only postpones the problem until the money is cut off . 
under this bill , the funding is gradually reduced so that , each year , there is encouragement for them to find new sponsors to replace the tobacco sponsors . 
i have not yet mentioned one important group , and that is farmers . 
the last $ 10 million of the $ 120 million goes to farmers . 
that is designed to assist them to find other crops . 
after marihuana , tobacco is the most lucrative crop , acre for acre , in Canada . 
it is very difficult for a tobacco farmer to move away from tobacco . 
if they want to grow tomatoes , they need to have a contract from Heinz . 
if they want to grow , say , cucumbers for pickles , they need to have a contract from Bick ' s . 
when they grow grapes , it takes three years before they harvest their first crop . 
when they grow apples , it takes five years before they harvest their first crop . 
when they grow ginseng , it takes seven years before they harvest their first crop . 
therefore , it is very difficult for farmers to move away from tobacco , which is an incredibly lucrative crop . 
they do not have many options and they have a lot of money tied up in equipment . 
one of the purposes of this bill is to assist them in finding another way to earn their living ; to assist them to find a crop to grow other than tobacco . 
the farmers were completely overlooked in Bill C - 71 . 
no one took into consideration that some people would be injured in the process of reducing smoking in Canada . 
this bill takes that into consideration . 
no discussion of a levy being attached to a carton of cigarettes would be complete if it did not address the problem of smuggling . 
young people are very price - sensitive . 
the higher the price of cigarettes , the less they smoke . 
in 1994 , when we had high taxes on tobacco , youth smoking was reduced quite significantly . 
we cut those taxes because we found we were creating a lawless society . 
we found we were going back to something similar to the Prohibition era . 
the government cut the total cost a pack of cigarettes in order to reduce that trend . 
the people who have been working on this bill and I have been very concerned not to increase the price of cigarettes back to the point where smuggling will commence again . 
you are all aware that the federal Minister of Finance and the ministers of finance of five provinces have just recently increased tobacco taxes by $ 1.20 a carton . 
in fact , even with the bill in place , it would be more lucrative to smuggle cigarettes from Quebec and Ontario into New York rather than in the opposite direction . 
i do not believe that smuggling will be an issue here . 
i do not believe it will be a problem . 
i should like to briefly draw to the chamber ' s attention something called Proposition 99 which took place in California in 1988 . 
proposition 99 is referred to briefly in your summary . 
in a nutshell , it added 25 cents in tax - not a levy , but a tax - to each pack of cigarettes in the state of California . 
they did this without reducing advertising or promotion , as we have done here in Canada . 
they simply added a tax , boom , to each pack of cigarettes . 
the American Cancer Society estimated that 2 billion fewer packs of cigarettes were smoked as a result of Proposition 99 . 
they also estimated that 400,000 premature deaths were averted as a result of it . 
California is no bigger than Canada . 
California has a population very similar to the size of Canada . 
if Californians can bring in a proposal like this and take the money and use it to attack smoking , we can too . 
we do not need to have 40,000 people dying every year . 
we do not need to spend $ 3 billion a year on health care costs . 
if we spend $ 120 million a year now , then 15 years from now one - third of 40,000 deaths of young people will have been averted because of the education program , and one - third of $ 10 billion could be deducted from our health costs . 
it is a real " no - brainer . " 
very simply , it is a levy for industry purposes . 
we are proposing it because the tobacco industry came to a committee of this chamber and said they were prepared to work with any credible organization and to take on the fight against young people smoking . 
they did not make any promises for people over the age of 18 , but they did make commitments for people under the age of 18 , and that is who this bill is directed at . 
those are the people who are making life or death decisions right now about whether or not they will smoke . 
this bill introduces a levy of fifty cents a carton . 
it will not cause more smuggling . 
the fifty cents a carton produces $ 120 million in the first year . 
the first $ 60 million goes into the program to educate young people . 
the first $ 50 million goes to help those groups that are dependent upon tobacco funding to find replacement funds , and the first $ 10 million goes to tobacco farmers . 
the contributions to the latter two groups go down 20 per cent a year , so eventually they will get down to zero . 
we want to encourage them to move to something else , tobacco farmers to other crops and the entertainment people to finding other sponsors . 
banks are making huge profits , and if organizations are approached properly , they will step up and fill the gap . 
as the arts and sports $ 50 million in contributions drops to zero and as the farmers ' $ 10 million in contributions drops to zero , the fund for education goes up . 
it goes from $ 60 million up to $ 120 million . 
it stays at $ 120 million until smoking starts to drop off , and we all hope we will see it trail off because people are buying fewer and fewer cartons of cigarettes . 
honourable senators , that in a nutshell describes the bill . 
i have left with you some letters of support . 
they are not just random letters , but letters from credible groups endorsing the bill . 
i encourage you to take a look at the signatures and the letterhead on these letters . 
these are serious people who feel this bill can work . 
we have an Easter break coming up . 
i encourage you to go back to your communities , check it out , ask the people where you live whether they think this is a worthwhile thing to take on . 
ask the people who are specialists in your area whether they think it is worthwhile going after young people at the decision - making age and whether that makes sense to them . 
ask the people where you live whether or not you want a transition fund so that the arts and cultural groups have a chance to find other sponsors . 
if you are from a farming area , particularly in southwestern Ontario , ask those people if they need some help to move to another crop . 
i believe you will find that the answer is yes to all of those questions . 
i hope , after considering this bill , it merits your support . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I have no intention of repeating what our colleague Senator Kenny has said . 
i do , however , wish to go on record as a supporter of this bill . 
you will recall that Senator Kenny and I had a difference of opinion last year when Bill C - 71 was being discussed , not on the objective of that bill but rather on its implementation . 
we were very much in agreement on the objective of Bill C - 71 . 
as Senator Kenny has just said , the various witnesses who appeared before us demonstrated its shortcomings . 
you will recall that we were on the verge of an election campaign at that time . 
it was not the right time to amend a government bill . 
we did try , but unsuccessfully . 
today , Bill S - 13 is the measure that complements Bill C - 71 . 
i have three children , two of them teenage boys aged 15 and 14 . 
when I explained Bill S - 17 to them , both reacted by saying " Quit spending money on advertising aimed at us . 
the programs we watch don ' t have ads . 
at 15 , we are non - smokers and have pretty well worked out our problems . 
we want people our own age to talk to us . 
keep in mind , Dad , that 70 per cent of kids our age don ' t smoke . 
only 30 per cent do , a minority . " 
what Bill S - 13 proposes is that the tobacco industry be involved . 
senator Kenny has just responded to a call from the tobacco industry . 
they came to us in good faith to tell us they did not want young people 18 or under to be smoking . 
" we lack the credibility to initiate a program , but if anyone decides to start one up , they can count on us to take part . " 
after hearing this , Senator Kenny seized the opportunity to respond . 
bill S - 13 is a response to a call by the industry . 
having spoken to an important member of this industry no later than yesterday evening , I would not be surprised if we were to see them publicly support such a bill . 
we have the same goals , especially those who , like me , are trying to stop smoking . 
it is difficult . 
i am very aware that it sets a bad example for my children . 
i do not smoke in their presence . 
but this bill makes it possible for a foundation , rather than public servants , to bolster local measures , measures closest to the intended audience , that is , our children , your grandchildren , these 9 , 10 and 11 year olds . 
it is not even a burden . 
smokers will pay that without a murmur . 
they are happy to pay the money and they will say thank you . 
the committee will study the bill closely , as it did Bill C - 71 . 
we will try to examine all aspects of the issue : there will certainly be amendments . 
is five years the period allowed for replacing tobacco sponsorships ? 
the bill says five years , but it could be six , depending on the evidence . 
changes might be required and you will be presented with the final product . 
i will touch on tobacco sponsorships . 
i have been following this issue in Quebec mostly . 
a study released last December tried to assess the relative value of tobacco sponsorships in Quebec . 
as Senator Kenny pointed out earlier , most of the time tobacco companies sponsor major events . 
in 1997 , they sponsored events to the tune of $ 31 million . 
they paid cash to sponsor eight events we are all familiar with , namely the Grand Prix , the fireworks , the jazz festival , the Just for Laughs festival in both official languages , the Francofolies , all major events taking place in Montreal . 
in addition to this $ 31 million , tobacco companies spend another $ 11 million on publicity for these events . 
this means organizers do not have to pay for this publicity themselves . 
we are talking about a total amount of $ 42 million . 
there is no doubt that , if we ask them what they think about our bill , they are going to say they liked the legislation better before Bill C - 71 was passed . 
we have to explain to them that Bill C - 71 is the law of the land . 
there is nothing we can do about it ; that is just the way it is . 
on the other hand , our bill recognizes the fact that an implementation date of October 1998 is too early . 
there are major economic benefits to be derived from a $ 42 - million investment in the Quebec economy , and the Montreal economy in particular . 
the elimination of this financial assistance would be disastrous . 
i cannot conceive of these eight events disappearing . 
for Quebecers and many other communities , this bill will soften the blow . 
some will certainly say this was not the right solution . 
but when we can get them to really discuss the purpose of the bill , they admit they will gladly take the money . 
instead of losing it all , they will take the money . 
i urge you to support this bill . 
we will consider the bill , amend it as required and help ensure its goals are met . 
those of you who have something to contribute to this transition for our children are more than welcome . 
this is a good bill , which deserves consideration , and I hope this consideration can begin as soon as possible in committee . 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , I would like to give my support to my colleague Senator Kenny , and to thank Your Honour for his efforts in determining whether the bill is in order . 
i also want to say that , as a former Minister of Youth and a former Minister of Amateur Sports and Health , I am familiar with the issue of tobacco sponsorship . 
the Conservative government did take some measures to discourage young people from smoking . 
still , any society should strive to achieve a balance between the rights of certain citizens and the obligations of others , including parents , people in positions of authority and legislators , who have a duty to protect young people , particularly from such a major threat to their health . 
therefore , I feel that the bill to be reviewed by the committee will definitely help improve the situation . 
however , honourable senators , I must say that , as a senator who has received a number of letters from anti - smoking groups , I do not appreciate being blackmailed and threatened by that lobby any more than I like being pressured by the other side . 
we are here to make decisions based on facts , and not to give in to undue pressure . 
the interests of young people are well represented in this bill , since we will be able to take measures to discourage young people from smoking , while also contributing to the success of cultural and sports events held across Canada . 
it is in this spirit that I thank Senator Kenny for the tremendous job he did in preparing his bill , and that I assure him of my full support . 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , I would like to commend Senators Kenny and Nolin on the amount of work they have put into this bill and the support that they have gained around the country for the concept . 
however , I have grave problems with this proposal . 
having spent my career operating on people whose health has been destroyed by tobacco and having observed the unconscionable conduct of the tobacco companies in Canada and abroad , I cannot possibly imagine endorsing a bill that provides for the Canadian tobacco industry ' s " Community Responsibility Foundation . " 
the Canadian tobacco industry has been totally irresponsible and continues to be totally irresponsible . 
i believe it is the responsibility of government to continue to tell the Canadian public , particularly our young people , how completely irresponsible the tobacco industry is . 
unfortunately , even though many of the medical associations and societies , my colleagues and so forth have written endorsements for this bill , I cannot and will not support a bill with that type of title . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Kenny , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
transport and Communication 
motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sittings of the Senate - Order Withdrawn 
on the Order : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit at 4:00 p.m. on Tuesdays for the duration of its study of Bill C - 9 , the Canada Marine Act , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I understand Senator Bacon would like leave of the house to withdraw Motion No. 62 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order withdrawn . 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Robertson calling the attention of the Senate to its lack of full accessibility to Canadians with disabilities , and to a means for dealing with disability issues . - ( 
honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise today to respond to the speech given by the Honourable Senator Robertson on February 18 . 
in it she called the attention of the Senate to its lack of full accessibility to Canadians with disabilities and proposed a strategy to improve the situation . 
today , I will speak to both of these issues . 
first , honourable senators , allow me to remind you of Senator Robertson ' s depiction of Canada , with which I am in full accord . 
she described Canada as a country that promotes and protects equality , that encourages self - reliance and independence , and that provides opportunities for full participation in civic and community affairs . 
i am sure each and every one of you agrees with this portrayal . 
i am equally confident that we all recognize that to obtain the goal of a truly equitable society , we must identify and address our shortcomings . 
as part of our responsibilities as senators , I believe we do this on a nearly daily basis in Canada and for the Canadian public . 
however , the time has come for us to look at our own doorstep . 
as Senator Robertson informed us , there are a number of obstacles which impede full participation in the life of the Senate by Canadians with disabilities - senators , employees , visitors and committee witnesses alike . 
our House of Parliament is supposed to be a house of the people . 
needless to say , there should be no barriers to its accessibility . 
it is my understanding , and I am pleased to inform those who are not yet perhaps aware , that this issue is being examined by the Internal Economy Committee in response to Senator Robertson ' s most recent address on the matter . 
i should like to thank Senator Robertson for bringing to this issue the attention that it deserves . 
Canadians have the right to receive adequate accessibility in whatever setting they are in - whether it be the Senate chamber or in relation to their mental , physical or social health . 
let us consider Health Minister Allan Rock ' s promise of a national home care scheme . 
just as there is a need for adequate access to this building and this chamber , there is a need for access to satisfactory health care service in Canada for both disabled and able - bodied Canadians . 
one such service is home care . 
home care has been sited by the Minister of Health as the area most urgently in need of modernization within the Canadian medical health care system . 
honourable senators , with the issue of home care goes the issue of accessibility . 
we must both identify and address the shortcomings . 
we must look at the potential repercussions , both positive and negative , of the minister ' s attempt to integrate home care with Canada ' s health care system . 
as Senator Robertson suggested in her proposal , let us learn from the experience of the people . 
let me provide an example . 
during last week ' s question and answer session at the federal Liberal women ' s commission meeting , Ms Johanna Breijer relayed the specific need for support for those who attend to home care - a need that is most often for ailing parents and family members , and most often provided by women . 
it must be ensured that trained support staff to help with the burden of caring for an ill person will be put in place . 
in fact , a web site for support for those " who know how agonizingly difficult home care can be " is maintained by the magazine . 
i do not provide that care because he lives in Vancouver and I am here in Ottawa . 
my husband is his only child . 
there are no nieces or nephews available in Vancouver , so we pay for home care to be provided there . 
as I was gathering together the notes for this speech , I decided that , since I am the one who writes the cheques to pay the bills - albeit with grandad ' s money , but I write the cheques - I could tally up what it costs to look after him in the home . 
on average , it costs us $ 55,000 a year . 
he is in the very comfortable situation of being able to afford this kind of care . 
how many Canadians can afford that kind of care in their home ? 
last summer , when I was there for ten and a half weeks providing that direct care while I put the alternative care processes in place , I also recognized what a great feat it is to find the kind of quality care for the home that is required . 
much of that cost is beyond the ability of the average Canadian . 
we consider ourselves a very fortunate family in that , for us , it is a cost we can easily meet . 
honourable senators , it is imperative that we , as representatives of the Canadian government , address the issue of accessibility in all its dimensions , whether that be access to this very building , which is a physical barrier to a portion of the Canadian populace , or access to adequate home care services . 
we need for our Senate to be accessible . 
we need for public buildings to be accessible . 
we need for the ill , elderly , disabled and caregivers to have access to adequate home care and support . 
now that the Internal Economy Committee has recognized the importance of the issue for this chamber , let us broaden our outlook to the issue of home care . 
at the close of Senator Robertson ' s speech on February 18 , she informed the chamber that the Prime Minister was to visit the United Nations in New York on March 2 to receive the Franklin Delano Roosevelt award for Canada ' s outstanding achievements in the field of disability . 
canada has an international reputation for being the most accessible country in the world . 
i am standing before you today , honourable senators , not only to remind you of this achievement and of our role to ensure accessibility to our institutions , but also to say that we , too , have not gone far enough . 
in closing , let me remind you of a speech given by Senator Cohen . 
in it she stated : 
we must never hesitate to strive to improve the lives of all Canadians , and we must never hesitate to strive for the moon . 
for even if we miss , we will find ourselves among the stars . 
when you reach for the stars the least you will achieve is the moon . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore , pursuant to notice of March 31 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Senate urge the governments of the provinces and territories to ensure that their laws respecting the enforcement of interprovincial subpoenas explicitly provide that they are applicable , not only to courts of law , but also to commissions of inquiry ; 
that the Senate also urge the government of any province or territory to amend such laws where they are not clearly applicable to commissions of inquiry in order to remove any doubt ; and 
that a message be sent to the Assemblies of the provincial and territorial legislatures to acquaint them accordingly . 
in November of 1995 , the commission of inquiry began its hearings into the Westray Mine tragedy of May 9 , 1992 . 
it involved an underground explosion killing 26 miners , 11 of whom are still entombed in the mine . 
both refused to testify . 
the commission of inquiry was appointed under the Nova Scotia Public Inquiries Act and the Coal Mines Regulation Act . 
these statutes authorize the commissioner to summon witnesses in the Province of Nova Scotia , to require them to give evidence on oath , and to produce any documentation necessary for the investigation . 
consequently , in April 1996 , the Province of Nova Scotia passed legislation to permit the enforcement of subpoenas interprovincially . 
this occurred while the inquiry was still ongoing . 
the Province of Ontario already had this type of statute in place , namely , the Interprovincial Summonses Act . 
the Nova Scotia act is described as an act respecting the interprovincial enforcement of subpoenas . 
under this statute , a person may apply to a court of a province in order to obtain a certificate signifying that a judge of that province is satisfied about three matters : first , that the attendance of a particular person who is resident in another province is necessary for the adjudication of the proceeding in which the subpoena is issued ; second , that the attendance of the person is reasonable and essential ; and third , that the subpoena is accompanied by witness fees and travelling expenses . 
the certificate must then be sent to a court in the province in which the person whose attendance is sought is resident in order to obtain judicial authorization to have the subpoena enforced in that province . 
one of the arguments they raised was that the interprovincial subpoenas legislation in Ontario did not apply to commissions of inquiry but was limited to courts of law . 
because of these delay tactics , the inquiry was unable to hear from them . 
the commissioner of the inquiry had a deadline to meet , and had to decide whether to report without the testimony of these two key witnesses , or not to report at all and wait until all possible appeals were exhausted . 
Mr. Justice Richard decided to meet his deadline and report without the testimony of Mr. Frame and Mr. Pelley . 
in my view , this is a grave injustice . 
the Senate should support any action that would prevent such a situation from occurring in the future . 
the definition of the term " court " in the Ontario Interprovincial Summonses Act does not explicitly include commissions of inquiry ; it refers only to any court in a province . 
this is the case with many of the other provincial and territorial acts dealing with the interprovincial enforcement of subpoenas . 
therefore , while all of the provinces and territories have such statutes , many of these laws , like the Ontario statute , define the word " court " ambiguously , and leave doubt as to whether the term includes commissions of inquiry . 
the provincial and territorial acts which require amendment would include Prince Edward Island , Manitoba , Newfoundland and Labrador , British Columbia and the Yukon . 
in summary , the Senate should encourage these provinces and territories to amend their respective acts to broaden the definition of " court " to include other quasi - judicial bodies so that the problem that occurred in the Westray inquiry is less likely to occur again in the future . 
in Nova Scotia , for example , the definition of " court " includes any court in the province of Nova Scotia or another province of Canada , and includes a board , commission , tribunal or other body of that province or another province of Canada . 
the matter is also something that should be discussed at the next Uniform Law Conference , if possible . 
it is a subject that is of great importance , especially in light of the whole purpose of establishing commissions of inquiry . 
they are created to shed light on events that have occurred , where problems and difficulties have arisen , and where there is some concern that things could have been done better . 
such commissions are an opportunity to learn from our mistakes by gathering the facts that will help us discover the truth respecting events and occurrences . 
such truth can be drawn from written and oral evidence and from key witnesses who have personal knowledge about the matter . 
when a tragedy occurs that kills dozens of people , the Canadian public has a right to know what really happened . 
this right should not be frustrated because of technical legal arguments that are put forward to deliberately avoid the matter being properly aired and the truth being told . 
for all of these reasons , I hope that you will join me in urging the provinces to do what they can to address the matter by supporting my motion . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , debate adjourned . 
aboriginal Peoples 
first Nations Government Bill - Committee Authorized to Apply Materials and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bills to Study of Current Bill 
hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of April 1 , 1998 , moved : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples during its study of Bills S - 10 and S - 12 ( An Act providing for self - government by the First Nations of Canada ) in the Thirty - fifth Parliament be referred to the Committee for its present study of Bill S - 14 . 
motion agreed to . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notices of Motions : 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like senators to understand that arrangements have been made for the Standing Senate Committees on Banking , Agriculture , Transport and Rules , and the Subcommittee on Communications to meet at various times during the third week of our so - called non - sitting weeks . 
this third week will clearly be a committee week . 
therefore , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , April 28 , 1998 at 2:00 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , April 28 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 54 
Tuesday , April 28 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Volunteer Week 
the Late Honourable John W . H . Bassett , P . C . 
tributes 
human Rights 
visit of Prime Minister to Cuba 
charter of Rights and Freedoms 
health 
full Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Motion Before House of Commons 
visitors in the Gallery 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
income Tax Amendments Act , 1997 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Notice of Inquiry 
goods and Services Tax 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Tabling of Report 
the Senate 
Felicitations upon Return to Chamber 
question PERIOD 
human Rights 
current Situation in Cuba - Ratification and Signing of OAS Convention - Government Position 
canada - United States Relations 
incidents of Harassment of Canadian Travellers by U.S. Customs and Immigration Officers at Canadian Airports - Government Position 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Government Position 
human Rights 
reopening of Trade with Burma - Reassurance of Commitment to Stated Government Policy - Government Position 
the Environment 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Signing and Ratification of Kyoto Agreement - Government Position 
heritage Canada 
cut - backs by Canada Council to Funding of Royal Winnipeg Ballet - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists - Abstention from Voting at Recent Conference - Government Position 
health 
full Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Motion Before House of Commons - Possible Establishment of Joint Committee - Government Position 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
participation of Leader of Government in Debate - Request for Tabling of Auditor General ' s Report - Request for Response 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
the Economy 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Possibility of Tax Cut - Request for Particulars of Studies Conducted - Government Position 
the Budget 
inequity of Tax Policy towards Non - Working Mothers - Government Position 
human Rights 
possible Promotion by Prime Minister of International Human Rights - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Relations 
prospect of Funding for Clean - Up of Halifax Harbour - Government Position 
energy 
power Generation Facility to be Built on Lower Churchill River , Newfoundland - Availability of Federal Funds - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
unrest in Cities in North Korea - Ramifications for Treaty Obligations with South Korea - Government Position 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Department of Labour - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
finance - Minister of Finance - Cost of Economic and Fiscal Update in Vancouver 
energy - National Gallery of Canada - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Museum of Nature - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - National Capital Commission - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Treasury Board - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - Message from Commons 
orders OF THE DAY 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
telecommunications Act 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Order Stands 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , April 28 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Volunteer Week 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , last week was National Volunteer Week . 
some of you may know the story about the four people named Everybody , Somebody , Anybody and Nobody . 
there was an important job to be done , and Everybody was asked to do it . 
everybody was sure that Somebody would do it . 
somebody got angry about that , because it was Everybody ' s job . 
everybody thought that Anybody could do it and Nobody realized that Everybody would not do it . 
it ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody when actually Nobody did what Anybody could have done . 
the point is that that important job did not get done because none of the people in question understood that leadership is not someone else ' s concern . 
leadership has to come from all of us . 
responsibility is not someone else ' s concern ; it has to come from all of us . 
these are people who are driven to leave the world a better place than they found it . 
these are people who understood what we collectively lose when citizens say too often and too easily , " What is in it for me ? " 
if this great federation has become the envy of the world community , it is in large measure because of the selfless devotion and countless hours of unpaid energy by volunteers over the decades which have in many important ways made it so . 
they built barns and opened up forests and served on the home front in wartime to keep liberty alive overseas . 
they have tended the aged and the lonely . 
they have fed the hungry and kept hope alive in our communities and our neighbourhoods , in amateur sports , in schools , in youth outreach programs and human rights organizations . 
when floods struck the Saguenay and Winnipeg regions , thousands of volunteers flocked in to battle these natural disasters , showing unequalled courage , patience and determination . 
when the ice storms hit Eastern Ontario , Quebec and the Maritime provinces , their compassion and care for those in the shelters , streets and communities , gripped by darkness , fear and cold brought warmth , light and friendship to many . 
yes , these are our volunteers , people who understand that the true measures of success come from a repository that does not change . 
the true measures of success come from the human spirit and all the qualities of sharing , and discipline , and commitment , and involvement which make this world a better place . 
i am sure we all sometimes wonder how the beautiful Canada geese , flying in their V formation , can fly so far . 
we know they change leadership in flight to protect the formation . 
when the leader who fights the headwind becomes exhausted , another instinctively takes over . 
that is an example of perfect cooperation in nature . 
in fact , scientists have discovered in wind - tunnel tests that a flock of geese can fly 72 per cent farther and faster by cooperating in this manner . 
w ( 1410 ) 
as we think about the millions of daily activities of volunteers across this country , we see that cooperation is always the key to flying farther - the kind of cooperation which assumes leadership without being asked ; the kind of cooperation which is as open and honest and instinctive as the marvellous Canada geese flying in formation ; the kind of cooperation which never wonders what is in it for me ; the kind of cooperation which protects the formation no matter how strong the headwinds . 
honourable senators , as we honour our volunteers , we remember the repository that does not change - that is , the repository of the human spirit and the commitment of service to others which have made volunteers our greatest natural resource . 
to all the volunteers of Canada , thank you . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , we support what the Leader of the Government in the Senate has said . 
honourable senators might recall that it was Alexis de Tocqueville who , in his visit to America , remarked upon democracy in America . 
one of the elements of democracy in America on which he focused , was the role of the voluntary sector in the practice of freedom . 
we , too , underscore the importance of volunteerism for civil society in Canada and accept the premise that volunteerism is a fundamental dynamic in a free and democratic society . 
we also note that it was Thomas Hobbes , an author of the authoritarian state , who observed from his vantage point that the voluntary sector had the odour of disorder about them and , indeed , continued further in his Leviathan to consider that the voluntary sector was a threat in his mind to civil society and to democratic governance . 
his famous line is that these lesser societies , the voluntary sector , were like so many " worms in the entrails of natural man . " 
Thomas Hobbes is , of course , rejected by those of us who support parliamentary democracy and the practice of freedom . 
we recognize that a strong and vigorous voluntary sector speaks directly to that freedom , and we join with the Leader of the Government in the Senate in saluting volunteers from coast to coast to coast . 
the Late Honourable John W . H . Bassett , P . C . 
tributes 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , I rise today to pay tribute to a man who truly lived life to the fullest . 
on the death of John Bassett , it is appropriate to lift up and celebrate his life and his contribution to this country as I know he would wish . 
John Bassett ' s accomplishments include his life as a sportsman , newspaperman , broadcaster , entrepreneur , a would - be politician , father , husband and a World War II veteran . 
i have had the pleasure of knowing him personally for 25 years and can truly say that , throughout those years , I enjoyed his wit , his competitiveness and his love for our great country . 
John Bassett was born in Ottawa on August 25 , 1915 , the son of an Ulster immigrant . 
however , it was in the communications industry , first as owner of the Sherbrooke Record , in his work for The Globe and Mail , as publisher of the Toronto Telegram , as a founder of the television station CFTO in Toronto and the CTV network , and in sports as a director of Maple Leaf Gardens and the Toronto Argonauts that he will be best remembered . 
his newspaper battles with The Toronto Star are stuff of which legends are made and illustrate his competitive instincts . 
his love of sports was evidenced by his involvement with both the Maple Leafs and the Argos , and I guess we can all speculate on what could have been with regard to the Maple Leafs if he had won the battle with Harold Ballard for control of the hockey club . 
in spite of all his activities , he found time to serve his country and to play a prominent role in public life in trying to foster better understanding among the races and peoples of our world . 
the lives of many have been enriched by the causes he led . 
on behalf of myself and I am sure all of us in this chamber , our sincere sympathies go to his wife , Isabel , his sons Doug and David , whom I know , as well as Avery , Sarah and Matthew , and his grandchildren , including Carling of tennis fame , and all other members of the Bassett family . 
human Rights 
visit of Prime Minister to Cuba 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , yesterday , Prime Minister Chr é tien completed a two - day visit to Cuba for meetings with President Fidel Castro . 
fellow senators , I do not understand the hypocrisy of this government in relation to human rights . 
last Tuesday , the Canadian government joined with the United States and 14 other countries at the United Nations in voting to condemn Cuba for its human rights violations . 
however , the next very week , our Prime Minister is shaking hands with the very man whom he condemns . 
among the 19 countries that voted against condemnation were China , Chile , Uruguay , Pakistan , Mozambique and Malaysia , to name a few , all of which do not have stellar records respecting human rights . 
by this visit are we aligning ourselves with the human rights philosophies of these countries . 
do we now have more in common with China and Chile than we do with the United States and Britain when it comes to the issue of human rights ? 
by this visit to Cuba , the Prime Minister is telling the world that Canada is not serious in its condemnation of human rights abuses by the Cuban government . 
even more appalling , the Prime Minister ' s visit sends the message that we are turning a blind eye to the abuse and suffering of Cuban people inflicted by their own government . 
i , as all Canadians , was proud that our government led a boycott in a trade embargo against that country and pressured all other countries to do the same in an attempt to isolate it from the rest of the world . 
honourable senators , that country was South Africa , and today , thankfully , all South Africans have the fundamental rights which , for so long , were denied them by their own government . 
the Cuban government remains one of the most repressive regimes in the world . 
there are over 500 political prisoners in Cuban jails . 
their crimes ? 
they spoke for the values of freedom and democracy . 
they had the courage to take a stand against repression and to speak the truth . 
i consider these prisoners to be heroes , and I wonder what they would say about our Prime Minister ' s visit to Cuba . 
some Hon. Senators : 
false ! 
senator St. Germain : 
i know it is fashionable to be anti - American these days , but I , for one , believe we have more in common with the United States than Cuba . 
when it comes to the issue of human rights , I would rather stand and be counted with the United States of America than the present government of Cuba . 
charter of Rights and Freedoms 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , April 17 marked the 16 th anniversary of the entrenchment of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in the Constitution . 
jurists feel that this was the most important constitutional milestone since federalism was born in 1867 . 
former Chief Justice Brian Dickson stated in 1985 that the Supreme Court intended to build a " cathedral of jurisprudence " on individual Charter cases . 
it has issued 350 rulings on the meaning of the Charter since 1982 . 
no other constitutional document affects the life of each and every Canadian citizen as closely . 
we have been living in the era of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms since the 1948 Declaration , which is considered the modern - day equivalent of the Magna Carta for the individual . 
our Charter is also interpreted in the light of the great universal values acknowledged by international instruments such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , and the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms . 
we Canadians are very much entitled to pride in our great constitutional charter . 
as Benjamin Franklin has said about the American Bill of Rights : 
god grant that not only the love of liberty but a thorough knowledge of the rights of man may pervade all the nations of the earth , so that a philosopher may set his foot anywhere on its surface and say : " This is my country . " 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
health 
full Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Motion Before House of Commons 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , the papers report today that Minister Rock will stand firm on a " blood deal . " 
some Hon. Senators : 
shame , shame ! 
senator Andreychuk : 
articles continue to indicate that today ' s vote on the issue is critical . 
when we have a natural disaster such as a flood or we run into other environmental difficulties , the government rallies to help its citizens . 
however , here we have a national disaster which has resulted from a blood supply on which we grew to rely , to care about and to support . 
we supported it in many ways . 
we took children away from their parents , violating their right to religious freedom and violating their right to parental controls and obligations , to save the life of a child , because we believed our blood system was reliable and acceptable . 
when that blood supply failed , it failed the citizens of Canada , not legally , but morally . 
it failed us in a way for which we must all take some account , because any one of us could have received a blood transfusion . 
yet , we have turned this disaster into an issue of legal responsibility . 
there should be no plan A or plan B . However , perhaps the government has a different responsibility to those who contracted this disease after 1986 , but that is a separate health issue . 
i appeal to the government . 
there is still time to act as a morally responsible , democratic institution . 
allow the Prime Minister to declare this issue a national disaster and help all victims of the tainted blood supply . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I support most of what Senator Andreychuk just said . 
when Mr. Justice Krever requested that everyone who contracted hepatitis C through tainted blood be compensated , he never thought this would become one of the most politicized issues . 
on the one hand , I find it unfortunate that members of the other place have stooped to wanting first and foremost to embarrass the government and politicize the issue . 
on the other hand , I very much admire members of Parliament like Mark Assad and John Richardson , who was the English - speaking vice - president of the students ' federation at the University of Ottawa when I was the president . 
they are deeply affected by this issue . 
they have been trying for many years to find a solution . 
i find it sad that the debate on such a fundamental and human issue has turned out this way . 
i will have a few questions for the Leader of the Government later . 
honourable senators must start working together . 
if a Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access can be a forum which allows people to come forward and share with senators and members of the House of Commons their concerns about those questions , surely the Senate could intervene in an attempt to depoliticize this issue , and to encourage the government to stop using the provinces as an excuse by saying that this is a deal with the provinces . 
perhaps honourable senators could propose to members of the House of Commons that a joint committee be struck to find a solution to the difficulties that will be encountered by those people who will , unfortunately , be excluded from the settlement that will be voted on this evening . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
[ later ] 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I would draw your attention to the presence in our gallery of distinguished visitors . 
they are from Russia , members of the Federation Council of the Committee on the North and Indigenous Peoples . 
on behalf of the Senate , I bid you welcome . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call the next item on the Order Paper , I should like to introduce to you Ms Julia Polyck of Whitehorse , Yukon Territories who joins us under our Pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons . 
Julia is enrolled in the Faculty of Arts at the University of Ottawa , and she is majoring in visual arts. 
welcome to the Senate . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave from the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , April 29 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
w ( 1430 ) 
royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 12 , to amend the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , April 30 , 1998 . 
income Tax Amendments Act , 1997 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 28 , to amend the Income Tax Act , the Income Tax Application Rules , the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act , the Canada Pension Plan , the Children ' s Special Allowances Act , the Companies ' Creditors Arrangement Act , the Cultural Property Export and Import Act , the Customs Act , the Customs Tariff , the Employment Insurance Act , the Excise Tax Act , the Federal - Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act , the Income Tax Conventions Interpretation Act , the Old Age Security Act , the Tax Court of Canada Act , the Tax Rebate Discounting Act , the Unemployment Insurance Act , the Western Grain Transition Payments Act and certain Acts related to the Income Tax Act . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , April 30 , 1998 . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 57 ( 2 ) , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , April 29 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the session of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly held in Strasbourg , France , from January 26 to January 30 , 1998 . 
goods and Services Tax 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , 269 Canadians from the Greater Toronto region have asked me to present a petition to this chamber on their behalf . 
on September 19 , 1992 , Prime Minister Jean Chr é tien said : 
applying tax to books and periodicals discourages reading . 
the Liberal Party has passed a resolution calling for the removal of the GST on books and periodicals , and that I will do . 
these 269 Canadians petition the Senate as follows : 
the GST is the first federal tax in Canadian history to apply to reading materials . 
taxing reading is unfair and wrong . 
literacy and reading are crucial to Canada ' s future . 
removing the GST from reading materials will help promote literacy in Canada . 
these 269 Canadians urge the Senate to adopt Bill S - 10 , which would free reading from the burden of the GST . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Tabling of Report 
leave having been granted to revert to Tabling of Reports from Inter - Parliamentary Delegations : 
hon. Jerahmiel Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I should like to table the report of the delegation to the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association on the session of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , Strasbourg , France , January 26 to 30 , 1998 . 
the Senate 
Felicitations upon Return to Chamber 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I welcome back to the chamber two of our senators who have been on the sick list for some time , Honourable Senator Balfour and Honourable Senator Phillips . 
welcome back . 
we wish both of you better health . 
question PERIOD 
human Rights 
current Situation in Cuba - Ratification and Signing of OAS Convention - Government Position 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
prior to the 1993 election , the Liberals , in their foreign policy handbook , said that they would speed up the process of ratifying and signing the OAS Convention on Human Rights . 
Cuba has not yet signed the OAS Convention on Human Rights because it is not a member . 
could the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us if anything has been done in this regard ? 
what did the Prime Minister and the delegation from his office do on their trip to Cuba with regard to this matter , if anything ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not specifically aware that the Prime Minister raised the question of the OAS convention . 
i am aware that during his two days in Cuba the Prime Minister had more than seven hours of face - to - face talks with President Castro , much of which time was spent discussing the human rights situation and progress under the 14 - point Canada - Cuba Joint Declaration . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , is the Leader of the Government in the Senate at liberty to tell us what progress the Prime Minister made on human rights during those seven hours of face - to - face discussions with President Castro ? 
i think Canadians would like to know , in view of the fact that this has been a historic and controversial trip . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , among other things , the Prime Minister asked President Castro to release four of Cuba ' s most prominent dissidents , who have been held without charges since last July , as I am sure Senator St. Germain knows . 
we are very encouraged by the fact that President Castro promised to consider the matter . 
that is one of the things , along with the 14 - point Canada - Cuba Joint Declaration , that the Prime Minister discussed with President Castro . 
canada - United States Relations 
incidents of Harassment of Canadian Travellers by U.S. Customs and Immigration Officers at Canadian Airports - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , on March 26 , the Leader of the Government in the Senate was asked in the Senate to what extent the government monitors and reacts to the mistreatment of Canadian travellers in airport pre - clearance areas . 
his response was : 
the Government of Canada monitors these situations on a continuing basis ... 
i believe that our southern neighbours are sometimes contemptuous of Canadian travellers . 
to further highlight that , I recall that in March of this year Bloc Qu é b é cois MP Monique Guay was detained by U.S. customs officials while en route to Ottawa from Africa . 
the customs officer was described by Ms Guay as " very impolite . " 
the officer insisted that she was a U.S. citizen and demanded to see her American passport despite her clear identification as a Canadian parliamentarian . 
w ( 1440 ) 
these are no longer isolated incidents . 
when will the government stand up for the rights of Canadians travelling to and through the United States ? 
will it raise this question as a serious issue at the next round of Canada - U.S. parliamentary discussions ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure it would be quite easy to have the issue raised at the next meeting of the Canada - U.S. Parliamentary Association , and I commend the Honourable Senator Forrestall for making that suggestion . 
as I said , this is a matter which is of concern to the government , and it is being monitored on a continuing basis . 
however , because of the incidents to which the senator has referred , I will bring his question to the attention of the minister responsible and discuss it with other people who have responsibility in that area . 
senator Forrestall : 
might I ask further , honourable senators , about the government ' s attitude with respect to visa policy ? 
should Canadians be required to obtain visas to travel in the United States in the future , and will American travellers to Canada also require a visa ? 
senator Graham : 
i am sure that would be a matter of policy on the part of governments on both sides of the border . 
however , I have had no indication to that effect . 
i know and have read of others who have done the same . 
in one particular instance , they were rejected because their driver ' s licence was not an indication of citizenship . 
i believe I heard a distinguished diplomat from the United States indicate that he was a citizen of the United States living in Canada , but with an Ontario driver ' s permit , which would not validate him as being a citizen of Canada . 
however , although it is a matter of some interest , I cannot say that it has come to our attention as a matter of urgent and pressing importance such that either government is considering the absolute necessity of demanding the production of a passport . 
the Senate 
lack of Accessibility for Disabled to Facilities - Government Position 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , on February 18 , my esteemed colleague Senator Brenda Robertson treated this chamber to an eloquent and powerful inquiry on the lack of accessibility for the disabled to parliamentary facilities . 
in that presentation , she noted that this very chamber is inhospitable to those who do not have the ability to move about unencumbered by physical disability . 
she also noted that the visitors ' galleries above are conspicuously lacking in this regard . 
she then proposed a simple , three - step process to deal with disability issues . 
what have we done that demonstrates a serious consideration of Senator Robertson ' s proposal ? 
at the end of the day , can it be said that the Senate has been responsive to issues of disability access ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I take the concerns of Senators Cohen and Robertson very seriously . 
it is my understanding that the chairman and members of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration have been seized with the problem . 
it is to be hoped that they will bring in a report that will enable us to take the necessary steps to meet the requirements and the difficulties that are faced by those who are physically disabled . 
human Rights 
reopening of Trade with Burma - Reassurance of Commitment to Stated Government Policy - Government Position 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , recently a minister , speaking on behalf of the Government of Canada , indicated that the Canadian government was willing to look at the issue of resuming aid to , and perhaps trade with , Burma . 
however , that statement was withdrawn with admirable speed by Minister Axworthy , an action supported by Secretary of State David Kilgour . 
however , the question of why the statement was made remains in the public eye . 
the newspaper articles in Canada ' s press correctly reported what the minister had said . 
the retractions were also there , and I am pleased that they were . 
at one point , there was a $ 100,000 fund to support that movement . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Government of Canada ' s policy towards Burma has not changed . 
if the Burmese military regime showed a concrete commitment to national reconciliation and the restoration of democracy , then Canada would seriously consider a resumption of aid to support a transition to democracy . 
unfortunately , of course , no such commitment is evident . 
i think it has been some years since a Canadian official has made a visit to Burma . 
with respect to reinstating the money to the pro - democratic forces in Burma , I would be very happy to present to those responsible for such matters the worthwhile suggestion of my honourable friend . 
the Environment 
reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions - Signing and Ratification of Kyoto Agreement - Government Position 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , I would ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate to explain to the Senate what is occurring with respect to the Kyoto agreement . 
i understand that the minister intends to sign that agreement this week . 
however , I also understand that , in fact , the agreement will not become a reality unless and until the United States signs . 
furthermore , I understand that the United States will not sign the agreement unless the underdeveloped countries sign it first , and those countries say they will not sign it because they are not the polluters . 
i also understand that the Canadian government has entered into an agreement with the provinces whereby an examination of the Kyoto agreement will now be undertaken in order to determine if it is realistic or , from the government ' s point of view , cost effective . 
i also understand that no economic analysis has been done with respect to the Kyoto agreement to determine whether it is practical or achievable . 
why , then , with all of the conditions surrounding the acceptability of this piece of paper , are we signing the agreement at all ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
first , I confirm that Minister Christine Stewart will sign the agreement in New York tomorrow on behalf of the Government of Canada . 
while Senator Ghitter was asking his questions , it struck me that perhaps he should be on this side answering the questions , since he is in possession of a great deal of information on this particular subject . 
it is true that the ministers responsible had an excellent meeting in Toronto last Friday . 
they discussed the best ways of implementing measures that would take us to a stage where we could ratify the Kyoto protocol . 
the Government of Canada fully intends to ratify the protocol when the time is right . 
we expect our trading partners , including the United States , to do the same . 
senator Ghitter : 
is the time right for the Government of Canada to ratify an agreement that they are already signing ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators will know that signing the agreement is the first indication of support for that agreement . 
the implementation of the agreement and its ratification are further steps that will need to be taken in the normal process . 
senator Ghitter : 
perhaps I did not articulate my question appropriately . 
i understood the Leader of the Government in the Senate to say that Canada will ratify the agreement when the time is right . 
when will the time be right ? 
senator Graham : 
i hope that the time will be right when we have an agreement with all of the provinces , and full implementation at least with regards to the process . 
senator Ghitter : 
i understand that the provinces had stated that , in their view , the agreement was unrealistic . 
if the provinces then determine that it is not a realistic agreement and will not be part of it , does that mean that the Government of Canada will not ratify this agreement ? 
senator Graham : 
i am not aware that the provinces have indicated that the agreement is unrealistic . 
perhaps the honourable senator would share with us the source of that information . 
senator Ghitter : 
to respond to the question , my source is an article in one of Saturday ' s newspapers , which quotes Mr. West of the Government of Alberta as having said that the economic analysis should have been done before federal officials agreed to the target in December ' s negotiating session - 
the article goes on to say that the agreement is not realistic . 
i would be happy to pass this clipping over to the honourable leader . 
senator Graham : 
i thank my honourable friend for his assistance . 
heritage Canada 
cut - backs by Canada Council to Funding of Royal Winnipeg Ballet - Government Position 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
my question concerns the recent cut - back in funding to the Royal Winnipeg Ballet . 
as you may know , citizens of Manitoba are staunch supporters of culture , and approximately 45 per cent of the people of Winnipeg regularly attend the ballet , symphony , or some other cultural program . 
in terms of per capita attendance , the citizens of Winnipeg are the most enthusiastic patrons of culture in this country . 
our flagship institution , the Royal Winnipeg Ballet , is widely regarded as the premier ballet company in Canada , if not the world . 
why , then , has the Canada Council decreased its support to the Royal Winnipeg Ballet by 10 per cent ? 
Winnipeg ' s major arts institutions are already besieged with problems , which are arguably more serious than those faced by other Canadian cities . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for her question . 
i know that the Royal Winnipeg Ballet is an excellent group , renowned not only in the province of Manitoba but right across the country . 
i will refer the question to the honourable minister responsible for Canada Council grants . 
the Canada Council is at arm ' s length from the government ; it makes its own decisions . 
senator Johnson : 
thank you very much . 
i would like to know if that information could be available sooner rather than later , because of the budget preparation for the current fiscal year . 
senator Graham : 
i will attempt to get the information as soon as possible . 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists - Abstention from Voting at Recent Conference - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
i have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
he will recall that , last month , I asked a question pertaining to Uganda and the use of children as human shields and trained killers . 
i wish to congratulate the Minister of Foreign Affairs for admitting that , at a recent conference , departmental officials bungled the vote on a motion relative to the child soldier issue . 
however , with respect to such a serious issue of which the department has been aware for so long , how can the government explain their abstention in such a critical vote ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the government has admitted that it made a mistake . 
obviously , the message from the Government of Canada did not get through to those who were representing the government at that very important conference . 
the government has apologized and , it is hoped , set the record straight . 
health 
full Compensation for Hepatitis C Victims - Motion Before House of Commons - Possible Establishment of Joint Committee - Government Position 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
in view of the confusion , and following my comments earlier today in Senators ' Statements , perhaps the minister might propose to cabinet the establishment of a special joint committee of the Senate and the House of Commons , similar to the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access , to investigate what further can be done . 
i am not denying that tonight ' s vote is an important first step , but if anyone here believes that that is the end of the question then they are dreaming in Technicolor . 
it will only grow and become more difficult . 
any good politician can see that this situation will develop . 
there will be no end to it . 
would the government consider my suggestion ? 
it is not , by the way , my suggestion alone . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
with respect to the comments in the preamble of the question of the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme , I think there was a clear case of misunderstanding between the Deputy Prime Minister and those with whom he met . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
if not , I will be persistent and ask if you have delivered the message , and then you might say that you did not have time . 
given a reasonable time , will you agree to respond to us in public , and not in private , as to the success of your mission from a senator ? 
senator Graham : 
i will be happy to respond publicly to the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme in the normal course , as we always do . 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
participation of Leader of Government in Debate - Request for Tabling of Auditor General ' s Report - Request for Response 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , may I ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate when he intends to follow through on the undertaking he gave the Senate several weeks ago to enter the debate on the report of the special Senate committee and make a full statement on behalf of the government regarding the Cape Breton Development Corporation ? 
at the same time , and in preparation for this coming event , will he obtain and table in the Senate a copy of the Auditor General ' s special study of Devco , which is now in the hands of the board of directors and of the Minister of Natural Resources ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham : 
honourable senators , I will be responding at an early date , and yes , I will attempt to obtain a copy of the Auditor General ' s special report . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to questions raised in the Senate on February 17 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senators Jessiman and Stratton regarding the gap in disposable incomes in comparison with the United States ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on February 25 by Honourable Senator Cohen regarding inequity of tax policy towards non - working mothers ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 24 by the Honourable Senator Oliver with respect to international human rights ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 24 by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the prospect of funding for clean - up of Halifax harbour ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 25 by the Honourable Senator Austin regarding the power generation facility to be built on the lower Churchill River ; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 26 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Forrestall regarding the unrest in cities in North Korea . 
the Economy 
gap in Disposable Incomes in Comparison with United States - Possibility of Tax Cut - Request for Particulars of Studies Conducted - Government Position 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Duncan J . Jessiman and Hon. Terry Stratton on February 17 , 1998 ) 
when this government assumed office in 1993 , the US economy had already recovered from the 1991 recession and had begun a period of strong growth that has continued to this day . 
at that time , Canada was just shaking off the effects of the 1991 recession , Canadian tax burdens were already high and rising , and the federal deficit stood at $ 42 billion . 
for individual Canadians , this was a difficult period - real per capita disposable income declined by 6.6 per cent between 1989 and 1993 , thereby widening the per capita disposable income gap vis - a - vis the US . 
this government was , and remains , committed to reversing this decline . 
at the same time , the very serious fiscal situation we inherited required a step by step approach to full recovery that had to begin with elimination of the crushing federal deficit . 
this involved regaining control over transfers to governments , individuals , and institutions , and , while we did not raise any tax rates since 1993 , we could not forego revenues by cutting taxes . 
we therefore have not seen the rise in per capita disposable income that has occurred in the United States since 1993 . 
we have , however , made definite progress in improving the lot of individual Canadians and their families . 
the first condition for rising disposable income is growth and job creation . 
this is happening . 
more than 1 million jobs have been created in the private sector since 1993 . During 1997 alone , the economy created 372,000 new jobs - all full time and all in the private sector . 
as a result , since 1993 per capita disposable income has stabilized , and indeed aggregate disposable income has grown by 4 per cent . 
moreover , Canadians are wealthier today than in 1993 - the growth in average net worth per capita has accelerated , with real net worth per capita rising 6.4 percent from the end of 1993 to the end of 1996 , after rising only 2.6 percent between 1989 and 1993 . 
as a result of our success in fighting the deficit , in the 1998 budget we were able to put in place relatively modest , but still important tax reductions to provide assistance where it is needed most - at low - and middle - income levels . 
this is in addition to targeted tax reductions put in place in previous budgets to assist families with children , students , and others in need . 
the 1998 tax cuts mark the first installment of our policy of reducing overall tax burdens in line with our improving fiscal situation - more will be provided in the future . 
the Budget 
inequity of Tax Policy towards Non - Working Mothers - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Erminie J . Cohen on February 25 , 1998 ) 
a basic principle of the Canadian income tax system is that tax owed is based on the income of each individual taxfiler . 
this is the fairest way to determine tax liability , since it ensures that individuals can only be held responsible for taxes arising from their own personal circumstances . 
for example , it ensures that a spouse with low earnings is taxed on those earnings at a low rate , not at a rate that reflects the earnings level of the higher income spouse . 
each taxfiler in a two - earner family will therefore be eligible for the surtax reduction on the basis of his or her individual income , not their combined family income . 
in the specific case of the tax reduction proposed in the 1998 budget , this may lead to a higher level of tax relief for a two - earner family at the same family income level as a one - earner couple . 
however , at the same time the tax system contains a number of provisions that recognise the specific circumstances of families with a stay - at - home spouse . 
the spousal amount reduces income tax when one spouse earns little or no income and stays at home - the 1998 budget increased this amount by $ 500 for low - income taxpayers , along with the basic personal amount . 
this ensures that , as in the case of two - earner families , a low - income , one - earner family can receive up to $ 1,000 more in tax - free income as a result of the 1998 budget . 
in addition , a number of tax credits can be transferred between spouses where one spouse has little or no income , and individuals with earnings may contribute to spousal RRSPs . 
more important , the Child Tax Benefit and GST credit are based on family income , and the Child Tax Benefit has a special supplement for families where one parent stays home with the children . 
the supplement is $ 213 for each child under the age of seven where no childcare expenses are deducted . 
the 1998 budget committed to increase the Child Tax Benefit by $ 850 million per year - $ 425 million beginning in July , 1999 , and another $ 425 million beginning in July , 2000 . 
human Rights 
possible Promotion by Prime Minister of International Human Rights - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on March 24 , 1998 ) 
minister Dhaliwal and Secretary of State Chan discussed the issue of human rights with their counterparts in India and Pakistan . 
the human rights situation in India has been improving , but we remain concerned about ongoing violence in Kashmir and elsewhere in India . 
in Pakistan , we are pleased to see the open discussion of human rights issues in both the printed press and through the efforts of such organizations as the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan . 
we are concerned by the treatment of women in Pakistan as a result of the Hadood Ordinances and the persecution of minorities , particularly the Ahmadi and Christian communities . 
we look forward to the Government of Pakistan proceeding as soon as possible with the introduction of proposed amendments to the criminal code regarding the Blasphemy Law . 
federal - Provincial Relations 
prospect of Funding for Clean - Up of Halifax Harbour - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. J . Michael Forrestall on March 24 , 1998 ) 
the latest Halifax Harbour Clean - up proposal was tabled on March 24 , 1998 and was discussed further by Halifax Regional Municipality ( HRM ) Council at their Council meeting on March 31 . 
after review of the reports by the councilors , the subject of cost - sharing with other levels of government as well as exploring opportunities for other types of support ( contributions - in - kind ) will be addressed and pursued by HRM Council in the future . 
the objective of the proposal tabled on March 24 was to assist HRM Council with the development of a regional system to treat the raw wastewater currently being discharged to Halifax Harbour . 
as of the March 31 meeting , no formal representation on cost - sharing has been made at this time and neither ( provincial or federal ) level of government has yet been contacted on the current proposal by HRM . 
energy 
power Generation Facility to be Built on Lower Churchill River , Newfoundland - Availability of Federal Funds - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Jack Austin on March 25 , 1998 ) 
premier Tobin has informed the Prime Minister that a transmission line to the island may require some federal government support . 
the federal government has agreed to work with Newfoundland on economic and financial studies related to a transmission line from Labrador to the island , and to alternative options , in order to assess how the province might best meet its future energy needs . 
the studies should be completed within the next six months , and will be conducted jointly by federal and provincial officials . 
the federal government will not be in a position to assess Newfoundland ' s request for a transmission line to the island until the studies have been completed . 
foreign Affairs 
unrest in Cities in North Korea - Ramifications for Treaty Obligations with South Korea - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. J . Michael Forrestall on March 26 , 1998 ) 
rumours of fighting in the capital of North Korea , Pyongyang , reported in some media have been denied by foreign residents in this capital as well as by observers outside of North Korea and the South Korean government . 
they appeared at the same time the North Korean government held an annual military exercise . 
the Government of Canada continues to monitor the situation on the Korean peninsula closely . 
when the armistice was signed in 1953 , the Government of Canada joined other members of the United Nations in expressing its expectation that the parties to the armistice would scrupulously observe its terms . 
the Government expects all Member States of the United Nations - including the government of the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea - to respect the Charter of the United Nations and to settle their international disputes by peaceful means . 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Department of Labour - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 27 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
finance - Minister of Finance - Cost of Economic and Fiscal Update in Vancouver 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 67 on the Order Paper - by Senator Phillips . 
energy - National Gallery of Canada - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 93 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Museum of Nature - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 99 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - National Capital Commission - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 100 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
energy - Treasury Board - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 102 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - Message from Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons returning Bill S - 4 , to amend the Canada Shipping Act ( maritime liability ) , and acquainting the Senate that they have passed this bill without amendment . 
orders OF THE DAY 
criminal Code 
customs Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
telecommunications Act 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Ferretti Barth , for the third reading of Bill C - 17 , to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare , that the Bill be not now read the third time but that it be amended : 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 4 to 10 ; and 
( b ) on pages 1 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 2 to 24 as clauses 1 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
2 . in clause 3 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 18 and 19 ; 
( b ) on page 2 , 
( i ) by deleting the heading preceding line 1 , and 
( ii ) by deleting lines 1 to 40 ; 
( c ) on page 3 , by deleting lines 1 to 15 ; and 
( d ) on pages 3 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 4 to 24 as clauses 3 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
3 . in clause 6 on page 4 , by replacing line 36 with the following : 
" person who provides basic telecommunications services to con - . " 
4 . in clause 7 
( a ) on page 5 , by deleting lines 10 to 18 ; and 
( b ) on pages 5 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 8 to 24 as clauses 7 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Oliver is a member of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
by way of an order of this house , permission was given to that committee to hold hearings even though we are sitting , a position which I do not support . 
i think that committees ought not to be sitting when the Senate is in session . 
however , in this instance , the Senate did give authorization to the Banking Committee to hold its hearings , and Senator Oliver is with that committee . 
senator Oliver also has amendments before us on this bill . 
under those circumstances , I would ask that the adjournment of debate remain standing in the name of Senator Oliver . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands . 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators who were here at the time will recall that a bill identical to Bill S - 15 was introduced in the Senate by Senator Murray as Leader of the Government on July 20 , 1988 . 
senator Doody opened second reading debate on the twenty - sixth of that same month . 
the arguments put forward by Senator Doody 10 years ago are still valid today , and many of my remarks derive from them . 
the purpose of Bill S - 15 is not to do away with the formal Royal Assent ceremony as we know it . 
indeed , it is retained in the bill , which requires that the current procedure apply to the first supply bill and the first ordinary bill approved by both houses in any session . 
in addition , however , it would allow Royal Assent through a written declaration by the Governor General or his or her representative , which would then be signified to each house within 15 days . 
keeping the Royal Assent ceremony as we know it and allowing a written declaration as an alternative is a subject which has been before the Senate many times . 
in 1983 , Senator Frith presented an inquiry regarding the advisability of establishing alternative procedures for the declaration of Royal Assent . 
following a recommendation in March 1985 by the Special Committee on Reform of the House of Commons - the McGrath committee - that a new Royal Assent procedure be adopted , the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , chaired by Senator Molgat , recommended changes along the same lines . 
a careful reading of the debate on the report presented by Senator Molgat indicates general support for the idea but disagreement on how to implement it . 
a solution was found through the introduction of Bill S - 19 , referred to earlier , a bill which was lost following prorogation less than three months later . 
bill S - 15 now before us , as did Bill S - 19 earlier , incorporates the broad principles found in the Molgat report . 
the Royal Assent ceremony as we know it is not required by the Constitution Act , 1867 . 
the relevant provisions are in sections 55 , 56 and 57 which deal only with the granting , withholding and receiving of Royal Assent , which is necessary for a bill to be given force of law . 
section 5 of the Interpretation Act provides that the date of Royal Assent is the date of the commencement of an act if no other date is stipulated . 
while no law outlines the Royal Assent ceremony itself , a description of it can be found in Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms . 
canada is the only country to retain the formal Royal Assent ceremony requiring the presence of the sovereign or the Governor General , or his or her deputy . 
as stated in the McGrath report : 
we note that Canada is still using a practice which was abandoned by the United Kingdom Parliament in 1967 . 
in fact , no other Commonwealth Parliament has maintained the procedure still used in Canada . 
like Bill S - 15 , the Royal Assent Act does not specify details respecting the alternative procedure ; it simply authorizes it . 
parliament , as we all know , is made up of three entities - the Crown , the Senate , and the House of Commons - each of which is essential to a bill being enacted . 
our Royal Assent ceremony brings them together for the final step in the sometimes lengthy process before a bill can become law , and while the Crown does not refuse assent , it must still be sought . 
as one commentator has written : 
royal Assent is still a necessary formality , and is at the same time nothing more than a formality . 
i fear that what should be an event equal to its significance has become , over the years , a routine one stimulating little but passive curiosity from those who happen to witness it by accident . 
too often , a Supreme Court Justice acting as the Governor General ' s deputy disrupts the functioning of the court . 
too often , finding a deputy on short notice is difficult and embarrassing . 
too often , the deputy may be kept waiting beyond the appointed hour because of unexpected Senate proceedings . 
attending members of the House of Commons are usually outnumbered by their officials , particularly if the Senate is sitting after the House has adjourned . 
a late Thursday afternoon Royal Assent means a small turnout of senators . 
the atmosphere can be one of indifference rather than one of respect for an event , which while largely a formality is nonetheless essential , and reminds us of the evolution of the parliamentary system over the centuries . 
there are those who will argue that Royal Assent is archaic and should be simply done away with altogether . 
i will not engage in that debate today except to say that as long as Royal Assent is a requirement , let it be given the standing it deserves by treating the ceremony surrounding it with respect for its significance , rather than just a bothersome interruption of parliamentary business . 
what better way of doing this than by having fewer traditional ceremonies during a session . 
by allowing an alternative , Parliament would sanction the importance of the traditional Royal Assent ceremony by making it a special occasion , properly planned and well attended , rather than an obligation whose repetition denies its significance . 
bill S - 15 , however , takes these apprehensions into account by mandating at least two traditional Royal Assents during one session . 
the alternative suggested is to allow Royal Assent at times when the parties involved cannot agree on a time suitable to all , and to have more than the corporals guard from both Houses in attendance . 
the problem will become more acute once the House , as part of the parliamentary precinct renovations , moves to the West Block , to be followed by the Senate after the House returns to the Centre Block . 
this alone is reason enough to give serious consideration to this bill . 
honourable senators , I have deliberately not gone into a lengthy , detailed argument in favour of Bill S - 15 , feeling that this general outline is sufficient to stimulate interest in it . 
i am indebted to colleagues who have spoken on the topic over the years , to the Library of Parliament and to the Senate legal counsel for their thorough research which , together , contributed significantly to these remarks . 
i look forward to a full discussion at committee stage which I anticipate will lead to significant support from both sides when the final vote is called . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I should like to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition for his admirable brevity . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
international Francophonie Day 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Gauthier calling the attention of the Senate to the Journ é e internationale de la francophonie , on Friday , March 20 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Murray , P . C . ) . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I adjourned this debate on the international francophone community because I wanted and still want to make a few comments on the Canadian francophone community . 
my comments are based in part on the analysis made by several news media of figures relating to language groups in the 1996 census . 
these figures show that absolute number of anglophones and francophones has not changed much since 1991 , but that the proportionate representation of these two groups has decreased in relation to allophones . 
francophones represented 23.5 per cent of the population in 1996 , compared with 24.3 per cent in 1991 and 25.1 per cent in 1986 . 
in every province except Quebec , the use of French at home decreased between 1991 and 1996 , while the use of English and other languages increased . 
in light of these figures , some observers have decided that the Official Languages Act has been a failure , that the French - speaking minorities in at least seven provinces are doomed to extinction , that the rate of assimilation continues to rise and that demographic pressure is becoming unbearable among French - speaking minorities outside Quebec . 
some ten days after this debate adjourned , however , the Commissioner of Official Languages , Dr. Victor Goldbloom , tabled his 1997 annual report . 
as usual , the commissioner drew our attention to important deficiencies in the application of federal legislation and language policy . 
this year , he tackled the repercussions on linguistic justice of the many changes that have taken place within the federal government recently : the internal reorganizations , decentralizations , privatizations and , of course , cut - backs . 
he noted a reduction in the human and financial resources set aside for the official languages program . 
in several provinces , the percentage of federal offices that are bilingual has decreased with the restructuring of government services . 
in the case of new federal - provincial agreements on the workforce and the Employment Insurance Act , the commissioner is particularly critical . 
having set out five principles and eleven recommendations for the respect of linguistic rights in these agreements , the commissioner described the government ' s response to most of them as unsatisfactory . 
i assure honourable senators that I take the commissioner ' s criticisms of this and many other aspects of the linguistic situation seriously . 
i urge our colleagues on the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages to follow them up . 
the commissioner ' s report showed clearly that the federal government ' s new policies pose a new and unforeseen challenge to linguistic justice . 
if we do not resolve to take up this challenge , the linguistic regime will begin to unravel . 
although I am emphasizing the historic gains made in the realm of language since the 60 s , I am not unaware that we will have to continue to be vigilant and resolute if we are to preserve these gains in future . 
when I first came to Ottawa as a young departmental assistant , in the fall of 1961 , a debate was taking place in the Senate on whether to adopt a simultaneous translation system in this House . 
such a system had just been put in place in the House of Commons . 
there was not unanimous support in the Senate . 
a little later , there was a campaign organized by a group of French - speaking members of Parliament to have bilingual menus in the cafeterias on Parliament Hill , as opposed to English menus only . 
in the senior federal public service , there were just a few francophones , perhaps one or two deputy ministers , and very few anglophones could speak French . 
except in Quebec , public services provided in French by federal departments or agencies were insignificant . 
a French Canadian watching the federal administration at work in Ottawa , or in most regions of Canada , would see something that was quite foreign to him or her . 
with very little of his or her language and culture and very few fellow francophones . 
in a federation which , originally , was the result of a compromise between the two linguistic groups , this unfair situation could not have persisted . 
the generation of Quebecers that reached its maturity during the Quiet Revolution would not have put up with that . 
canada would have broken up . 
after being warned that a crisis was developing and that a confrontation between francophones and anglophones was looming in the not too distant future , the Pearson government created the Laurendeau - Dunton Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism . 
six years later , the Trudeau government introduced the Official Languages Act . 
in terms of public administration , what occurred in subsequent years represented a huge accomplishment . 
the job of bilingualizing the vast , unwieldy and unilingual public service from top to bottom was a monumental job . 
the federal administration , which I found to be essentially unilingual English in 1961 , today projects the image and the reality of Canada ' s linguistic duality . 
every year the Commissioner of Official Languages provides valid and sometimes harsh criticism on the availability and quality of bilingual services in government departments and agencies . 
sometimes he condemns the time the government requires before taking corrective measures . 
in general , however , the federal government is a bilingual institution operating in both languages . 
in 1982 , the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms enshrined the linguistic duality of federal and New Brunswick institutions and also made provision for individuals ' right to services from these governments in the language of their choice . 
francophone minorities succeeded in obtaining a constitutional right to education in their language , where numbers warranted it . 
in 1988 , I had the honour of shepherding the new Official Languages Act in this house on behalf of the Mulroney government . 
the 1988 Mulroney Act added a number of new and vital chapters to the 1969 Trudeau Act . 
part V provides that in some regions the government must provide a workplace where its employees may use French or English . 
part VI concerns the equitable participation of francophones and anglophones in the public service . 
part VII commits the government to promoting the vitality and development of minority language communities . 
the 1988 Act also authorized abinet to issue regulations governing the provision of bilingual services and the language of work , which were ratified in the following years . 
since 1988 , the Official Languages Act prevails over all other parliamentary legislation and regulations in the event of a dispute . 
as far as legislation and policy are concerned , every year , the Commissioner of Official Languages reports in detail on all shortcomings with respect to bilingual services , language of work , equitable participation by both linguistic groups within federal institutions , minority language education , and assistance to minority communities . 
at the same time , however , the COL reports provide ample evidence of the real progress that has taken place on all linguistic fronts . 
i will touch upon only two important aspects . 
still more interesting is the distribution of anglophones and francophones by job category . 
the other key sector I would like to focus on is minority language education . 
throughout the country , outside Quebec . there are more than 160,000 students in kindergarten through the last grade of secondary school , enrolled in 688 French - language schools . 
the unceasing efforts of francophone communities outside Quebec over many years has finally made it possible for them to obtain control over their school systems in most regions of the country . 
i am sure that this progress in the field of education is the best guarantee of a healthy future for francophone communities throughout this country . 
on August 18 , 1965 he wrote the following : 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt , but your time is up . 
honourable senators , is Senator Murray granted leave to continue his remarks ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Murray : 
i was quoting Andr é Laurendeau , Co - chairman of the Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism . 
he wrote these words during the summer of 1965 . 
there is no real bilingualism in the federal public service or in the armed forces . 
i was particularly struck by the rejection of French by the majority of anglophones who wrote or met with us : rejection , pure and simple , or rejection ( except in Quebec ) of the conditions that would make it possible to live one ' s life in French in Canada . 
by the fact that in no English - speaking province , not even in New Brunswick , is French openly accepted as equal in law , that nowhere does it seem about to become so , that everywhere , on the contrary , there is strong resistance : this is significant ... 
... as a French Canadian , I feel rejected in nine out of ten provinces . 
this is how a great many French Canadians feel , in my view , even outside Quebec ... 
it must not be forgotten that this is the case after 200 years of co - existence and almost one century of Confederation . 
some French - Canadian demands ( particularly for minority schools ) are as old as the realm . 
it seems that the strongest ( majorities , colonial power , economic forces ) have found psychological mechanisms whereby they forget the demands of others as they arise - until it comes to a showdown . 
so wrote Andr é Laurendeau in 1965 . 
earlier this year , the Department of Canadian Heritage released a most interesting study titled " Minorit é s francophones : assimilation et vitalit é des communaut é s . " 
the author of this document on francophone minorities , their assimilation and vitality , is Michael O ' Keefe , a manager in Policy , Analysis and Promotion , within that department ' s Official Languages Support component . 
he attempts to discover the truth , the reality which sometimes hides behind the statistics , and shows us other dimensions of the vitality of the minority communities . 
for example , he closely examines the expression " assimilation rate " and reminds us that it is often used without any clear definition or source . 
he notes that Statistics Canada avoids its use and has never endorsed any official definition . 
he challenges the analysis by certain commentators for whom the percentage of people speaking other than their mother tongue in the home is the equivalent of the assimilation rate . 
according to him , language use is a far more complex and subtle phenomenon . 
i will quote from the conclusion of this study , which I recommend to colleagues interested in this issue . 
the key indicators of the vitality of minority communities allow us to have a more complete picture of their current status and their future prospects . 
the latest census figures indicate a marked increase in the transmission of French from one generation to the next in communities outside Quebec , and also within mixed - language families ( English - French ) , a significant fact ... 
according to the census , during the period 1971 - 96 , young francophones were less likely to switch to English . 
will the strength of the French language observed among the young carry on to adulthood ? 
only time will tell . 
this information gives considerable support to the opinion that the schools and community infrastructure put into place in the past 25 years have had a measurable impact . 
the many interventions have indeed enhanced the status of the French language in minority communities , and in Canadian society as a whole . 
in a preface to this study , Dr. Rodrigue Landry of the University of Moncton contrasts Mr. O ' Keefe ' s prudent and balanced optimism with the " fears and panic often triggered by many studies on linguistic assimilation . " 
he joins Mr. O ' Keefe in deploring the sometimes defeatist attitudes of the minority francophone communities themselves . 
honourable senators , I have taken rather a lot of your time on this subject today . 
why is it important ? 
i believe we must understand that what was begun 30 years ago , to restore and renew the partnership between English - and French - speaking Canadians , has not been , as some would have it , a failure . 
it has been a success . 
it is , to be sure , a work in progress , an imperfect work but a successful work . 
hon. Senators : 
senator Murray : 
it has enhanced our national identity and our national pride . 
it has given us a greater presence and a wider influence in the world . 
it has provided opportunities for our children to enrich their cultural lives and broaden their horizons . 
most important , it has restored rights and legitimate expectations that had been denied for generations . 
the greatest fallacy about our linguistic duality is that it is exclusive . 
when we speak of the English - French dimension of Canada ' s existence , Mr. Preston Manning dismisses this as the " Plains of Abraham concept of Confederation . " 
to speak of the relationship between the French - speaking majority of Lower Canada and the English - speaking majority of Upper Canada that was central to the British North America Act of 1867 , defines the rest of Canada as mere extensions of Ontario , says Mr. Manning . 
what a lot of nonsense he speaks . 
nobody here pretends that the English - French relationship is all there is to Canada . 
since 1867 , we have written much more history and added much more geography and culture to our national identity . 
we say that the English - French relationship is a vital part of our being . 
it is at the heart of the social contract that underlies Confederation and , were it ever to unravel , Canada would cease to be . 
there is now some territoriality in our constitutional and legislative provisions on language , but Canada has struck a balance between this principle and the principle of individual choice . 
a report prepared four years ago for the Commissioner of Official Languages on this subject concluded : 
to change the balance now in favour of increased territoriality would have significant impact not only on existing legislation and policy , but on the Constitution as well , in particular minority education . 
the challenge is to increase our understanding that facilitating access to important public institutions in one ' s mother tongue can be accomplished without placing in question the regional predominance of a language . 
w ( 1540 ) 
we are indeed a community of communities . 
some of the most resilient , durable and now vibrant communities in this country are the minority language communities in various parts of the country . 
the francophones of Eastern Ontario who fought to save the Montfort Hospital last year did not achieve all they sought , but they still have a hospital . 
they have had recognition of its importance outside its immediate constituency . 
now they have some realistic hope and expectation of a wider , continuing role for Montfort . 
when one thinks of small but cohesive and vibrant minority communities outside Quebec , New Brunswick and Ontario , there come to mind two whose favourite sons are members of this chamber : the Acadians of southwestern Nova Scotia represented by Senator Comeau , and the Franco - Manitobans represented by our speaker , Senator Molgat . 
these small , French - language communities are a unique part of our history . 
when one thinks of the place in Canadian history occupied by that part of Nova Scotia , which had the first permanent settlement dating back to 1604 , or when one thinks of the part played in our history before , during and since Confederation by the Franco - Manitobans , it is clear that to exclude them , as they would be excluded in the so - called territorial approach , would be to deny an important part of our history and to renounce a precious part of our identity . 
another untruth about language matters is the story often enough heard that Quebecers are so preoccupied with the unresolved question of Quebec ' s place in Confederation that they do not care about the status of French in the rest of Canada or , worse , that they would be complicit in any scheme to ensure a unilingual French Quebec and a unilingual English Canada . 
in my humble opinion , nothing would be more certain to turn Quebecers away from Canada than the abandonment by Ottawa of its role in maintaining the linguistic duality of the country . 
the presence of a strong , mostly French - speaking Quebec is what makes linguistic duality possible and necessary in this country . 
the special place of Quebec in Canada , a question still unresolved , has been the subject of past debates in this house , and I have no doubt it will be before us soon again . 
on motion of Senator Corbin , debate adjourned . 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator Berntson : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to examine and report on the manner in which the chain of command of the Canadian Forces , both in - theatre and at National Defence Headquarters , responded to the operational , disciplinary , decision - making and administrative problems encountered during the Somalia deployment to the extent that these matters have not been examined by the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces to Somalia ; 
that the Committee in examining these issues may call witnesses from whom it believes it may obtain evidence relevant to these matters including but not limited to : 
2 . the then Deputy Minister of National Defence ; 
3 . the then Acting Chief of Staff of the Minister of National Defence ; 
4 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( M. Campbell ) ; 
5 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( J . 
6 . the persons occupying the position of Judge Advocate General during the relevant period ; 
7 . the then Deputy Judge Advocate General ( litigation ) ; and 
8 . the then Chief of Defence Staff and Deputy Chief of Defence Staff . 
that seven Senators , nominated by the Committee of Selection act as members of the Special Committee , and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses under oath , to report from time to time and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to authorize television and radio broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee have the power to engage the services of such counsel and other professional , technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purposes of its examination ; 
that the political parties represented on the Special Committee be granted allocations for expert assistance with the work of the Committee ; 
that it be empowered to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada ; 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the Committee submit its report not later than one year from the date of its being constituted , provided that if the Senate is not sitting , the report will be deemed submitted on the day such report is deposited with the Clerk of the Senate ; and 
that the Special Committee include in its report , its findings and recommendations regarding the structure , functioning and operational effectiveness of National Defence Headquarters , the relationship between the military and civilian components of NDHQ , and the relationship among the Deputy Minister of Defence , the Chief of Defence Staff and the Minister of National Defence , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Forrestall , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin , that the motion be amended by adding in paragraph 2 the following : 
" 9 . the present Minister of National Defence .. " 
- ( honourable Senator Poulin ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would inform the chamber that it was Senator Poulin ' s intention to speak to this matter this afternoon . 
honourable senators , I hope that this intervention will be sufficient for the order to continue stand in Senator Poulin ' s name . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , April 29 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 55 
Wednesday , April 29 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
canada Book Day 
transport 
discontinuance of De - staffing of Lightstations in British Columbia 
the Senate 
new Insignia 
transport 
ferry Service Between Newfoundland and Mainland 
Canadian Heritage 
funding Problems at Telefilm Canada 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
terrorism and Public Safety 
selection of Membership of Special Committee 
goods and Services tax 
removal of Tax from Reading Materials - Presentation of Petitions 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters - Government Position 
national Finance 
importance of Longer - Term Fiscal Projections - Government Position 
health 
staffing and Strengthening of New Federal Laboratories for Human and Animal Health - Government Position 
national Finance 
effectiveness of Fiscal Projections - Government Position . 
responsibility for Auditing of Canada Pension Plan Board - Government Position 
criticism by Auditor General of Government Accounting Methods - Government Position 
national Defence 
modernization of Equipment - Possibility of Issuance of White Paper - Government Position 
privacy Commissioner 
extension of Term of Present Incumbent - Government Position 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists in War in Uganda - Government Position 
human Rights 
orders OF THE DAY 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganizationand Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
national Unity 
position of British Columbia on Quebec ' s Status - Inquiry 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Inquiry 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , April 29 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
canada Book Day 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , last Thursday , April 23 , 1998 , Canadians across the country celebrated the third annual Canada Book Day . 
this event came from the efforts and the mind of a well - known author and journalist , Lawrence Martin , three years ago . 
since then , the celebration has spread to cities , towns and villages all across Canada , and is intended to encourage people to read , to enjoy books and to express support for our authors . 
honourable senators , in Ottawa we had a launch at Chapters bookstore with Dr. Marianne Scott from the National Library , Dr. Shirley Thomson from the Canada Council , Lawrence Martin , of course , and one of our authors , Brian Doyle . 
in Calgary , I was quite impressed when 350 Calgarians gathered to pay homage to the late W . O . Mitchell and to remember his writings . 
all of us would agree that his words , his humour and his sheer joy in writing and living prompted an affection for him here in our country , as well as an expression of support among his peers that is rare in our cautious Canadian society . 
he was truly the most eloquent writer of the Prairies . 
it is a new collection of his writings . 
i chose this book knowing that Senator Lynch - Staunton has family members scattered throughout southwestern Alberta . 
i wish him a very good read , and I would encourage all honourable senators to make every day " Book Day " in our country . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I think the only appropriate response is , " Gotcha . " 
i will ensure that the honourable senator ' s copy is signed by all those who support this bill , which I am sure will be every senator in this place . 
transport 
discontinuance of De - staffing of Lightstations in British Columbia 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , on March 28 , the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans announced that the de - staffing of lighthouses in British Columbia would not continue , and that the 27 currently staffed lighthouses would remain . 
nowhere in his statement did the minister have the elementary courtesy to give credit to the one person who is mainly responsible for this decision , our colleague the Honourable Pat Carney . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
as a Conservative minister , she persuaded her government not to proceed with a de - staffing program supported by senior departmental officials . 
then the Liberal government reversed this decision and de - staffing began . 
with constant letter writing , speaking on the issue at every opportunity , working closely with the Union of B.C. Lightkeepers and coastal communities , and keeping the issue alive in the media , Senator Carney tirelessly fought at every turn , with the result that the minister was forced to back down . 
his only acknowledgement of Senator Carney ' s efforts and the campaign led by her is found at the end of his statement where he says : 
British Columbians , particularly in the coastal communities , have asked us to keep the lightkeepers at their stations and that ' s why we ' re doing it . 
what he should have said is that British Columbians , led by the Honourable Pat Carney , had asked . 
she deserves no less . 
the Senate 
new Insignia 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
i am sure honourable senators can see the new Senate insignia I am holding in my hand . 
there you see it , with the red flame . 
if you turn the pin a little , it looks like a " No Smoking " sign . 
honourable senators will say , " But we voted for it . " 
well , people also voted for Mr. Manning . 
w ( 1340 ) 
our elders had this original design , and they commissioned a specialist to create it . 
if you needed a heart operation , would you not go to Senator Keon and let him do his job , which he does so well , or would you vote on instructions to give him on how to operate ? 
honourable senators , an article in today ' s Globe and Mail informs us that a judge found that the Somalia inquiry was a disgraceful affair , and very badly conducted . 
an officer was wrongly accused and without evidence by the Somalia inquiry . 
transport 
ferry Service Between Newfoundland and Mainland 
hon. Derek P . Lewis : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the situation regarding the ferry service between the Island of Newfoundland and mainland Canada . 
first , I must mention some historical facts . 
over 100 years ago Newfoundland , as an independent country , constructed at its own expense a trans - island railway system . 
it also established a coastal steamship service for the island and for coastal Labrador . 
Newfoundland further provided a freight and passenger steamship ferry service connecting the island to North Sydney in Nova Scotia . 
over the years , these systems were continuously maintained and operated by Newfoundland from its own resources . 
more important , these systems were managed and controlled by Newfoundland itself for the benefit and service of its citizens . 
this situation continued up to the time of the union of Newfoundland and Canada in 1949 . 
by the terms of the agreement covering the union of both countries , it was provided that Canada would take over these services and relieve Newfoundland of the costs thereof . 
by a further provision of the agreement , Canada undertook to henceforth maintain a freight and passenger steamship service between North Sydney in Nova Scotia and Port aux Basques in Newfoundland . 
these provisions were enacted into legislation by the Newfoundland Act of 1949 . 
in pursuance of these provisions after union , these particular transportation systems were incorporated into the Canadian National Railway system . 
ultimately , the steamship systems were given over to Marine Atlantic , which operated them along with similar services in our eastern provinces . 
the operations were run out of Marine Atlantic headquarters in Fredericton , New Brunswick , under the direction of a board of directors , the members of which were - and continue to be - appointees from several provinces . 
at the present time , Newfoundland has a small representation on this board . 
as it happens , Marine Atlantic has now been divested of such a number of its operating systems that all that remains under its administration is the ferry service between North Sydney and Newfoundland . 
the Minister of Transport has recently announced that Marine Atlantic would be moving its headquarters from Moncton and will split the administration between North Sydney , Nova Scotia , and Port aux Basques , Newfoundland . 
subsequently , the minister confirmed that the board of directors of Marine Atlantic would be restructured and replacements on the board would come solely from the two provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador and Nova Scotia . 
since the only remaining service of Marine Atlantic is now reduced to the sole , historic Newfoundland operation , it seems only natural and just that the management and operation of the service be returned to Newfoundland and Labrador . 
in view of the importance of this service to the people of my province in having access to mainland Canada , it is imperative that , in the future , the majority of members of the board having management of the service be appointees from Newfoundland and Labrador . 
i trust this will be accomplished . 
Canadian Heritage 
funding Problems at Telefilm Canada 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
honourable senators , I rise today to draw your attention to the recent problems at Telefilm Canada . 
for the last two weeks , Canadian television production has teetered on the brink of disaster due to a number of fundamental problems with the new Television and Cable Production Fund . 
the $ 200 - million Television and Cable Production Fund was launched amidst much fanfare by Canadian Heritage Minister Sheila Copps in 1996 . 
the fund was designed to stimulate the production of television drama and repair some of the damage done by the prior cutting of $ 400 million from the budget of the CBC . 
however , the fund was poorly planned and implemented , as was illustrated last week when an entire season of television production in Canada was thrown into chaos . 
television producers waited all night in corridors , sleeping on floors , so that they could access funding from the Licence Fee Program , which is handed out on a first - come , first - served basis . 
while the executive director of Telefilm was touring China , producers of acclaimed television shows like Traders and Black Harbour discovered that crucial letters of commitment from Telefilm had not arrived on time , and that they were therefore no longer eligible for Minister Copps ' funding . 
honourable senators , all but two of Canada ' s big name programs did not receive any support from the cable fund . 
now , many shows may have to cancel their coming seasons . 
i would submit that all - night lineups and sleeping bags are more appropriate for rock concerts than federal funding agencies , and awarding money on a first - come , first - served basis is no more logical than grading exams by throwing them down a staircase . 
what measures will the Minister of Canadian Heritage undertake to ensure that this system is retooled and made more rational and effective ? 
what is the logic behind the $ 200 - million fund ? 
our two major funding agencies have mandates which are clearly in conflict . 
few professionals in the television industry believe that these goals are reconcilable . 
some observers have even suggested that the disastrous tie - ups in the system were deliberate ; designed by disgruntled administrators to show us all that the $ 200 - million monster was just not working . 
in response to the disaster , some of Canada ' s flagship television shows were bailed out with $ 20 million taken from next year ' s budget , but this is only a short - term solution and not a very good one . 
what will happen next year ? 
this would be an appropriate time to launch a comprehensive review of the cable fund and determine how it can be operated more effectively . 
are the selection criteria rational ? 
do they coincide with the long - term goals of the Department of Canadian Heritage ? 
what , indeed , are the long - term goals of the Department of Canadian Heritage ? 
taxpayers may well ask why we are giving money to television producers in the first place . 
if the goal is to support culture , then why are government funds being used to support programs produced for the American market - place ? 
why are highly profitable private networks being subsidized with cheap , government - funded television programs ? 
is it time for private broadcasters to invest more in the programs that they air ? 
there are many issues at stake here , and I wanted to alert honourable senators to them today . 
the Television and Cable Production Fund is obviously plagued with some very serious problems . 
w ( 1350 ) 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
terrorism and Public Safety 
selection of Membership of Special Committee 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) , I move : 
that , notwithstanding rule 85 ( 1 ) ( b ) , the Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety comprise seven members ; namely , the Honourable Senators Andreychuk , Bryden , Corbin , Fitzpatrick , Kelleher , Kelly and Stollery , and that three members constitute a quorum . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , you will recall that I seconded the motion . 
it is a topic in which I have taken a special interest for over 30 years . 
and if any senators want to know what I mean by that , we will hold a debate . 
i am once again surprised that a senator who wishes to play an active role in the Senate ' s business is once again being ignored , when it is in the Senate ' s interest to make use of the talents of those senators who wish to work . 
senators who already sit on other committees , some of whom do not even attend those committees meetings , are being appointed to sit on this special committee . 
it seems that some senators have more influence with the leadership of the Senate than do others , since they are always being appointed as members of committees . 
i could put on a wonderful exhibition , but that will accomplish nothing . 
i am going to Alberta to make a speech about the Senate . 
this could be the subject of my speech . 
the problem of those who wish to participate has yet to be solved . 
as I said , senators who are members of committees , and who have a lot on their plates , are being appointed to other committees . 
one need only look at a list to see on which committees these senators sit . 
in the event that some people believe that , in order to hear matters of security one must be a member of the Privy Council , the senators who have been named to sit on this Special Committee on Terrorism and Public Safety are not members of the Privy Council . 
will I say " no " to Senator Kelly , for whom I have the highest esteem ? 
i cannot answer that question . 
i am agonizing over that question as I stand here . 
i am sure some of my colleagues are thinking that even if I do speak out , nothing will happen . 
i would remind them that there are other places I can speak . 
i do not know how many people like to appear on TV to defend the Senate . 
how many in this place are not afraid of the press ? 
some duck as soon as they see the press , and some who speak to the press should duck . 
i hope I said that correctly . 
those who speak should perhaps say nothing , and those who say nothing should perhaps open their mouths . 
some do not seem to realize that the country is under attack . 
do not dream in Technicolour about the change taking place in Quebec . 
you may need all your fighters in Quebec , because the country is still under attack , and I believe that senators could do much to help the country . 
however , what do you do ? 
you play favourites . 
you multiply the work of some senators . 
we spoke about that yesterday . 
you want to reduce the number of senators on committees of the Senate . 
i hope I am not revealing a secret . 
i have always said that the Speaker of the Senate should have more authority , as is the case in the House of Commons . 
i am not asking for your protection . 
however , I do think this is unfair . 
there are some senators who have something to offer their country and who can contribute to the work of the Senate , but they are not asked to come forward . 
i am told that this matter will be put forward for consideration , but nothing is done . 
what the hell is going on ? 
you all look surprised . 
the Leader of the Senate has approved this . 
he knows my interest in certain subjects , one being foreign affairs . 
am I excluded for reasons that you may not like to hear today ? 
am I too opinionated on certain aspects of world affairs ? 
i may have a lot to tell you about the history of security matters in Canada . 
i was in the other place for 30 years . 
i was there when the War Measures Act was passed : when we were lied to . 
do we not want certain senators to contribute ? 
i wish Senator Kelly good luck , but I will be a pain . 
i intend to attend that committee and I want to receive all the documents , to which the Speaker has said I am entitled . 
i was not a member of the subcommittee chaired by another fine gentleman , Senator Phillips , which did extraordinarily good work and saved the necks of the Liberals . 
veterans across the country were as mad as hell at the government . 
i am French Canadian from Quebec and I did not miss one meeting of that committee . 
granted , the Senate was not sitting at that time , and I am not asking for a star for that , like a little schoolboy , but if a solution is not found , I will stop barking and I will start biting . 
motion agreed to . 
w ( 1400 ) 
goods and Services tax 
removal of Tax from Reading Materials - Presentation of Petitions 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I present 357 petitions from the Kitchener - Waterloo and London area , 710 from all regions from the Atlantic to the Pacific , comprising the signatures of 1,100 Canadians who are asking us to support Bill S - 10 to eliminate the GST on reading materials . 
these petitions are particularly appropriate given Senator Fairbairn ' s eloquent presentation and statement . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i must say that , in common with thousands of other Canadians , I am well pleased with the government ' s decision to purchase the EH - 101 helicopter for search and rescue purposes . 
i must say that I had thought for a moment that his support for these programs was sort of like a conversion on the road to Halifax in a quest for the return of some of those NDP seats . 
the other 15 are waiting in the shed for the same operation . 
the Auditor General , as we have all just noted , has raised the issue of critical deficiencies with regard to military equipment . 
i must now plead to establish the parameters of how long is " soon , " how long is " shortly , " how long is " as quickly as possible , " and all the other definitions that we went through with the replacement of the search and rescue helicopter . 
how soon will we see the call for replacement of the Sea King ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for his kind reference with respect to the purchase of the Upholder class submarines . 
i had the privilege of participating in the announcement with the Minister of National Defence and the Premier of Nova Scotia in Halifax . 
indeed , at that time , I alluded to my love of the sea and told all assembled that that resulted in my enlisting very early in life and rising to the rank of Acting Petty Officer of HMCS Dreadnought . 
i have never heard of the rank of Substantive Petty Officer , but if you are making it permanent , I thank you very much . 
i will be looking forward to receiving the appropriate insignia which I can wear henceforth and always . 
i also thank the honourable senator for the reference to the EH - 101 , and I assure my honourable friends that the consideration of the purchase of maritime helicopters is ongoing . 
senator Forrestall : 
as a supplementary , there is some confusion in my own mind . 
the government has said , on the one hand , that they wanted to buy off the shelf because of the savings that are obvious , apparent and accessible to us for equipment such as this . 
they have also said that they would not be pursuing commonality of equipment for search and rescue and for shipboard operations . 
does that apparent conflict preclude the EH - 101 consortium from bidding on the seaboard equipment ? 
senator Graham : 
i suppose that you could interpret the inclusion of the term " commonality " as almost automatically giving the next contract to those who manufacture the EH - 101 . 
however , I assure my honourable friend , who takes a special interest in these matters , that the prime objective is to provide our service people and the country with the best possible equipment , while ensuring that the equipment is purchased with the interests of efficiency and savings in mind , and , at the same time , that the bidding is totally transparent . 
i am sure that those who are qualified will all have an opportunity to bid on the helicopters . 
senator Forrestall : 
will the minister give us some indication of time parameters ? 
senator Graham : 
i wish I could be more forthcoming in that respect , honourable senators . 
as soon as I receive the information , I will bring it forward . 
national Finance 
importance of Longer - Term Fiscal Projections - Government Position 
hon. Fernand Roberge : 
honourable senators , the Auditor General , in his recent report , urged the government to produce long - term fiscal projections to allow Parliament to better appreciate the long - term impact of the decisions we make today . 
he points out that this is crucial given the long - term impact on government finances of an ageing population . 
the government ' s standard response continues to be that it will achieve long - term goals by meeting short - term targets . 
the Auditor General , however , stresses that this is not about being accountable for the long term but is simply about taking the longer term into account in a public way . 
the United States now prepares and makes public projections of fiscal balances under various assumptions 40 years ahead . 
the effects of demographics , that is to say the ageing population , are explicitly considered in these projections . 
in rejecting the Auditor General ' s recommendation , the Department of Finance said : 
the government believes that presenting long - run fiscal projections to Parliament every year would serve only to detract attention from the important goal of debt reduction . 
honourable senators , where does the government think Parliament would shift its attention if it saw long - term fiscal projections ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure that long - term fiscal projections are ongoing . 
the government ' s fiscal plan is directly addressing the longer - term financial consequences of Canada ' s ageing population to which my honourable friend referred . 
we have consistently followed a two - stage approach in that respect . 
given that the deficit has been eliminated in just four years , this approach speaks for itself . 
also , by eliminating the deficit and putting the debt - to - GDP ratio on a permanent downward track , we are now in a much better position to deal with the longer - term demographic pressures . 
second , we have embarked on a separate process to address the longer - term demographic pressures facing Canada . 
for example , in cooperation with the provinces , we have ensured that the Canada Pension Plan will be there in the future , and in so doing we provided Parliament and Canadians with information on the problems and the proposed solutions . 
the honourable senator mentioned the United States and the long - term forecasts that are made by our friends south of the border . 
canada is also involved in looking at these issues with other countries through the OECD and the International Monetary Fund . 
health 
staffing and Strengthening of New Federal Laboratories for Human and Animal Health - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , the Auditor General points out in his report that the Federal Laboratories for Human and Animal Health located in Winnipeg , a project initiated in 1990 , is : 
... a potential source of pride for all Canadians as it contributes to the global effort to identify and combat human and animal infectious diseases . 
i agree with that statement . 
a branch of the CDC formally certifies laboratories before they begin to operate . 
can the Leader of the Government tell us whether the Government of Canada is ready to strengthen the power and role of the Canadian Office of Biosafety and the Biohazard Containment and Safety Unit ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i thank Honourable Senator Spivak for bringing this matter to our attention . 
that question has been under consideration and I will attempt to bring forth further information . 
senator Spivak : 
i know that it is wonderful to have : 
... the first facility in the world to combine laboratories concerned with both human and animal diseases , and the first in Canada capable of handling the most dangerous viruses known . 
however , at the completion of the Auditor General ' s field work , 70 positions have not yet been staffed . 
we are told that : 
senior program officials believe that staffing these positions with the right people is a challenge which must be met to ensure program delivery . 
i interpret that to mean that they have problems finding competent people . 
senator Graham : 
we are all aware of the potential hazards of a brain drain , but at the same time I am confident that , with the measures being taken by the government , with the restoration to previous levels of medical research funding and other research funding in the country , if there has been a brain drain of any consequence , it will be stopped . 
at the same time , I am sure there are those who wish to come north of the border because of life in Canada , and because of the facilities and research money that is provided here . 
i noted very carefully that 70 positions were supposed to be made available in Winnipeg . 
i am also aware that the government and the department responsible is looking very closely at this particular question . 
i am pleased that the Auditor General has noted that Canadians should take great pride in this very exciting , new facility . 
national Finance 
effectiveness of Fiscal Projections - Government Position . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
again it would appear that the Auditor General ' s accounting advice is continually being ignored by the Department of Finance . 
the response to the Auditor General ' s recommendation that the Department of Finance provide longer - term fiscal forecasts was that the department do not do that because it would distract Parliament . 
my question is : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the Minister of Finance is never paternalistic , and he is not hiding anything . 
this has been the most transparent government in the history of the country . 
senator Stratton : 
in response to the Auditor General ' s recommendation that the Department of Finance provide better information on the effectiveness of programs that it manages , the department indicated that it was too busy doing other things to measure any effectiveness . 
surely they could do a performance audit on a particular department once a year , not the entire government . 
that might show Canadians that indeed the finance minister is responsible for running the finances of the country , and illustrate to them that the operation is indeed transparent . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the Department of Finance already makes great efforts to achieve the objective to which my honourable friend is alluding . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
by cooking the books . 
senator Graham : 
never by cooking the books . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
what about the $ 2.5 billion ? 
senator Graham : 
that is $ 2.5 billion that the Canadian public was made aware of immediately , instead of making promises which are never kept , as did your government . When those promises are made - 
some Hon. Senators : 
oh ! Oh ! 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
tell us about the seniors benefit program . 
some Hon. Senators : 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
hepatitis , yes , full compensation . 
senator Graham : 
when promises and commitments are made , they are immediately booked . 
senator Gigant è s : 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
we have awakened them ! 
welcome back ! 
the Department of Finance does not want the Auditor General to audit the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board . 
i really am amazed at that , because it will be an ideal board on which to have done a performance audit , not every year but every two to three years . 
the same thing goes for the Canadian Wheat Board . 
it is an ideal board on which to do a performance audit every two to three years . 
can the Leader of the Government tell me why the Department of Finance is holding the work of the Auditor General in contempt ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
there are some accounting differences and principles - 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
cooking the books . 
senator Graham : - with respect to how the Department of Finance views appropriate accounting , as does the Auditor General . 
the Department of Finance has asked the chartered accounting firm of Ernst & Young if their accounting principles are appropriate . 
indeed , the answer has come back very much in the positive . 
w ( 1420 ) 
with respect to the CPP Investment Board , we have been down this road before , Senator Stratton . 
i believe that all thinking Canadians , and those who wish this to be as transparent as possible , would agree that the CPP fund should have its own auditor . 
at the same time , the Auditor General will have access to all of the financial statements that are produced by the CPP Investment Board . 
senator Berntson : 
we should check the transparency of Pearson airport . 
criticism by Auditor General of Government Accounting Methods - Government Position 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators I , too , should like to focus on the Auditor General ' s report , particularly his observations on the government ' s accounting practices . 
no private - sector firm could report the cost of buying a new piece of equipment simply on the basis of the owner ' s decision to buy that equipment . 
as the Auditor General noted in Chapter 9 of his latest report : 
parliamentarians should expect no less from government . 
honourable senators , I realize there is no point in asking if the government will listen to the Auditor General on its accounting practices because history has shown they will not . 
i should like to know if the government agrees with the Auditor General when he says in his report : 
if individual governments of the day are free to choose whatever accounting policies and practices they wish , readers will have no confidence that the financial statements are consistent or comparable over time . 
and without such confidence , the credibility of all financial statements is compromised . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Honourable Senator Di Nino has made specific reference to the Foundation for Innovation and the Millennium Scholarship Foundation . 
the government has made clear from the outset that when we take a decision that involves taxpayers ' money , then we book that money right away . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition : 
that is not done with revenue , so why would it be done with expenditure ? 
senator Graham : 
gone are the days when governments could rack up billions of dollars in promises and leave the bill to be picked up by another generation or at some later time . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
who wrote that ? 
did Ernst & Young write that ? 
senator Graham : 
we have sought from Ernst & Young , a very reputable accounting firm in this country , an opinion as to how the government would account for the circumstances were this a private - sector , commercial transaction . 
as a business person , Senator Di Nino has had a lot to do with accountants over the years . 
Ernst & Young ' s conclusions , using extensive references to the Handbook of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants , are that , were this transaction being conducted in the private sector , the government would be justified in citing the Foundation for Innovation as a liability and in accounting for it immediately . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
is the Auditor General wrong ? 
senator Graham : 
the Auditor General clearly disagrees . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
senator Graham : 
we believe that is an approach that Canadians will support because it is the most honest approach , it is the most transparent approach . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it is wrong . 
senator Graham : 
as well , it is the most accountable approach . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , if , today , Canadians make a decision to donate funds next year , will Revenue Canada allow these Canadians to deduct the money this year from their taxable income ? 
is this not treating Canadians differently from the way those in government are treating themselves ? 
senator Graham : 
absolutely not , honourable senators . 
good public policy requires that the government account for non - recurring expenditures when the government makes a binding commitment to undertake the expenditure , and that is exactly what this government has been doing . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , as a supplementary question , the legislative framework of both the Foundation for Innovation and the Millennium Scholarship Foundation assume an arm ' s length relationship , with the result that there is very little real , direct , accountability . 
the Auditor General once again says that he will take a closer look at both foundations to see whether " in substance or in fact , such entities operate at arm ' s length from the government . " 
if the Auditor General finds that these foundations are not operating at arm ' s length , will the government change the framework that governs these agencies to ensure that there is proper accountability to Parliament ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I am sure that an appropriate decision will be taken at that particular time if some questions arise as to the approach that is being taken . 
however , I am sure my honourable friend , who is fair - minded , would want to see what the results are in a year or two from now . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
why is it so good on the expenditure side and not acceptable on the revenue side ? 
senator Graham : 
the honourable senator knows that is not a logical approach . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it is based on an illogical decision by the government . 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , is the Minister of Finance serious in telling us he knows more about the rules of accounting than the Auditor General ? 
is that what you claim ? 
it makes no sense . 
what a childish thing to say . 
senator Graham : 
the Minister of Finance is the most able minister of finance in the history of this country . 
when I go over the list of previous finance ministers , I recognize the fine line I am walking . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
senator Graham : 
better than that , I would suggest you look at the list of other ministers of finance . 
the Minister of Finance has an able body of accountants who work on his behalf . 
there is a difference of opinion as to the approach that is taken , and it is an honest difference of opinion . 
the Auditor General would recognize that , as does the Minister of Finance . 
the Minister of Finance is the person who is accountable to the public of Canada at the end of the day . 
senator Bolduc : 
what the minister is saying is that the Minister of Finance is more familiar with the rules of the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants than accountants themselves are . 
senator Gigant è s : 
senator Bolduc : 
it is incredible . 
the Minister of Finance is acting like some sort of arrogant emperor . 
he is setting the rules of accounting in Canada . 
surely this is a joke ! 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
he is the best " Imperial Finance Minister " we have ever had . 
national Defence 
modernization of Equipment - Possibility of Issuance of White Paper - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , one or two more efforts like that and I will have to withdraw that substantive change , and perhaps even consider demotion ! 
honourable senators , the Department of National Defence has recognized that equipment modernization would be unsustainable at a spending level of only 9 per cent to 12 per cent . 
officials from the department have said they are prepared to take action and , indeed , are taking some action . 
one option is to " strategically rethink , over the long term , the structure and operation of Canadian forces . " 
sounds to me like the troop cuts of " Canada 21 . " 
w ( 1430 ) 
in any event , the department has already initiated a long - term examination of the Canadian forces , the results of which I hope will form amendments for consideration . 
it seems clear that the government action in fact jeopardized its own white paper on defence , and I quote : 
equipment deficiencies and shortages limit the capabilities available to implement the 1994 Defence White Paper . 
due to these circumstances and the consequences that flow from them , will the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate whether the government is contemplating a new white paper , a major statement on defence policy , or would he urge on his colleagues that something be done to rectify the uncertainty that continues to exist ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of any consideration that is being given to a new white paper , although the study on matters is ongoing at all times . 
however , I do wish to observe with respect to the Department of National Defence that the report of the Auditor General contains some very useful suggestions that will be incorporated by the government , more specifically by the Department of National Defence , in such a way that the department can be more efficient in doing business in the future . 
privacy Commissioner 
extension of Term of Present Incumbent - Government Position 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last week I went to what was supposed to be a retirement party for John Grace and Bruce Phillips . 
i found out when I arrived that it was not a retirement party at all , and that , in fact , Bruce Phillips ' term as Privacy Commissioner was to be extended for another two years . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
my understanding is that this matter is under active consideration . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 25 , 1998 , by the Honourable Norman Atkins regarding the use of children as protagonists in war in Uganda ; and a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 24 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Kinsella regarding the Organization of American States . 
foreign Affairs 
use of Children as Protagonists in War in Uganda - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Norman K . Atkins on March 25 , 1998 ) 
the Government of Canada is aware of the situation in Northern Uganda and the extent to which children are kidnapped and exploited by the brutal rebel group The Lord ' s Resistance Army and forced to fight as soldiers in support of the rebel movement . 
canada deplores the atrocities perpetrated against children and supports attempts by the Government of Uganda to end these barbarous practices . 
during recent visits to Uganda , the Secretary of State ( Latin America and Africa ) David Kilgour in September 1997 and the Parliamentary Secretary of Revenue Canada , Sue Barnes in January 1998 , received first - hand briefings from Ugandan leaders on the security situation in the north of the country and expressed Canada ' s concerns . 
CIDA is funding three NGOs that are active in helping the people of Northern Uganda affected by the hostilities : 
Canadian Physicians for Aid Relief ( CPAR ) which is running 8 projects in the area , World Vision which is operating a trauma camp for children who have escaped from the Lord ' s Resistance Army , and Emmanuel International which is providing food , clothes and shelter to those displaced by war . 
Mrs. Barnes visited these projects to show Canada ' s continued support for their excellent work with the Ugandan people . 
in addition , on 2 April , 1998 Foreign Affairs Minister Lloyd Axworthy and Minister for International Co - operation and Minister responsible for la Francophonie , Diane Marleau announced a grant of $ 650,000 to fund four projects aimed at demobilizing child soldiers and reintegrating them into civil society . 
one of these projects supports a coalition of international non - governmental organizations , Child Soldiers Coalition , in its effort to raise awareness of young child combatants in armed conflict . 
human Rights 
( response to question raised by No ë l A . Kinsella on March 24 , 1998 ) 
before Canada can ratify a human rights convention , we must ensure that we are in a position to live up to the commitments we would undertake by ratifying the convention . 
since 1991 , consultations have been conducted with federal , provincial and territorial officials to assess compliance of federal and provincial legislation with the American Convention on Human Rights ( ACHR ) . 
the provinces have identified numerous concerns , and the federal government has its own serious concerns about ratification of the ACHR . 
many of those stem from the fact that Canada was not a participant in the negotiations which led to the ACHR adopted in 1969 . 
many provisions in the ACHR are ambiguous or contain concepts which are unknown or problematic in Canadian law . 
more importantly , many provisions of the Convention are inconsistent with other international human rights norms , making it impossible for any country to comply with both the ACHR and those norms . 
by way of examples , the ACHR would preclude prior censorship , and therefore conflict with Canada ' s international obligations to suppress hate propaganda and child pornography . 
the ACHR would preclude the extradition of nationals , and therefore conflict with Canada ' s extradition obligations and our obligations to cooperate with International Criminal Tribunals or the future International Criminal Court . The 
ACHR contains a " right of reply " to inaccurate or offensive statements in the media , which is not known in our law and may conflict with Charter rights . 
the ACHR guarantees equality before the law but does not contemplate affirmative action . 
these are just examples of the concerns raised with respect to the ACHR . 
in order to ratify the ACHR at present , a very large number of reservations and statements of understanding ( SOU ) would be required . 
despite these difficult problems , Department officials are continuing to work on ways to reduce the number of reservations contemplated and to advance the process of ratifying the ACHR . 
in the meantime , Canada participates fully in the inter - American human rights system . 
our human rights record is already subject to scrutiny by the Inter - American Commission on Human Rights and we are subject to the individual complaint mechanisms . 
canada is an active promoter of human rights within the Organization of American States and the inter - American human rights system . 
orders OF THE DAY 
telecommunications Act 
Teleglobe Canada Reorganizationand Divestiture Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth , for the third reading of Bill C - 17 , An Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act ; 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 4 to 10 ; and 
( b ) on pages 1 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 2 to 24 as clauses 1 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
2 . in clause 3 
( a ) on page 1 , by deleting lines 18 and 19 ; 
( b ) on page 2 , 
( i ) by deleting the heading preceding line 1 , and 
( ii ) by deleting lines 1 to 40 ; 
( c ) on page 3 , by deleting lines 1 to 15 ; and 
( d ) on pages 3 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 4 to 24 as clauses 3 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
3 . in clause 6 on page 4 , by replacing line 36 with the following : 
" person who provides basic telecommunications services to con - . " 
4 . in clause 7 
( a ) on page 5 , by deleting lines 10 to 18 ; and 
( b ) on pages 5 to 12 , by renumbering clauses 8 to 24 as clauses 7 to 23 , and any cross - references thereto accordingly . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak on this order , is it your pleasure to adopt the motion in amendment ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
Yes. 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
on division . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the motion in amendment is defeated , on division . 
honourable senators , we now revert to the main motion by the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Ferretti Barth for third reading of Bill C - 17 . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
national Unity 
position of British Columbia on Quebec ' s Status - Inquiry 
hon. Pat Carney rose pursuant to notice of March 24 , 1998 : 
honourable senators will recall that the Calgary Declaration contained seven principles which our provincial and territorial leaders hoped would guide discussions on renewing the Canadian federation . 
the report carried good news and bad news . 
it recognized the importance of Quebec ' s place in Confederation , but it also reaffirmed a very real sense of frustration British Columbians feel about their role in Confederation . 
before I continue , let me review the political environment in which this poll was taken last fall . 
honourable members will remember the comments I made last September about the " The Fish Thing . " 
i have not had an opportunity to bring this issue to the attention of the chamber before because I was on medical leave for much of the fall session following knee surgery . 
my suggestion that the time had come for British Columbians to renegotiate our role in Confederation , given the federal government ' s neglect of B.C. priorities , such as the fishery , evoked an unprecedented groundswell of support from British Columbians and a terrific backlash from central Canada . 
my exact words were : 
i think that we have to rethink what we want from Confederation because the current arrangement is not meeting our needs and the fish war proves that . 
i was referring to the salmon treaty and the problems we have in the coastal fishery . 
asked by Vancouver Sun reporter Ian Mulgrew - who had phoned for a comment on lighthouse de - staffing - if separation was an option , I refused to rule it out , stating that we should take all our options to the table . 
those of you who know your B.C. history will recognize that my comments were consistent with those expressed by earlier B.C. politicians over our 126 - year partnership in Confederation , starting with the Terms of Union debates during our colonial days . 
Dr. John S . Helmcken , the elected member for Victoria City , said during the Confederation debates of 1870 : 
it is absurd to attempt to ally ourselves with a people 3,000 miles away ... 
in 1879 , British Columbia ' s premier , Amor de Cosmos - who had changed his name from William Alexander Smith to " Lover of the Universe , " and who sat as both Premier of B.C. and an MP in the other place - was quoted in Hansard as saying : 
i move for leave to introduce a bill , entitled an Act to Provide for the Peaceful Separation of British Columbia , seconded by any gentleman opposite who thinks proper to second it . 
the motion was not seconded . 
however the reaction of Vancouver Sun readers to a coupon poll based on my 1997 remarks was unexpected and surprising . 
nearly 700 of the 1,010 readers phoned , faxed or wrote in to support the suggestion of negotiation with separation as an option . 
this is around 70 per cent . 
hot - line radio shows heated up and debate raged . 
the resulting furore , including hysterical headlines and a vicious media attack that would peel the skin off a less hardened politician , illustrated one of my main arguments - that many B.C. issues are viewed by the central Canadian media through the prism of Quebec ' s concerns . 
it is as if we had no regional identity , no national vision beyond Quebec . 
our office received hundreds of phone calls , faxes and letters , an unusually high volume for a senator ' s office . 
clearly , many British Columbians are feeling frustrated with our present position in Confederation , but that does not mean that we are separatists , at least not at this point . 
however , the majority of responses dealt with a feeling that British Columbians want a united Canada and want to be proud of it . 
we want an opportunity to give more , but we must find a greater way to bring fairness and equality to the governing of our country . 
specific issues which drew negative comment were national milk marketing and federal shipbuilding policies , which were perceived as discriminating against British Columbians , our representation in Parliament , our share of federal financing , and other such issues . 
reflecting on all these responses , I think the general consensus was best conveyed by a Langley resident , who wrote : 
more disturbing were the results of a Southam - Global ( POLLARA ) poll released in December which indicated that half of British Columbians and Quebecers are unhappy with their lot in Confederation . 
when asked whether their province would be better or worse off after separation , one - quarter of those polled in B.C. and one - third of those polled in Quebec believed their province would be better off outside Canada . 
it is disturbing to think that the dissatisfaction in B.C. at that point in time was only six points behind the level of dissatisfaction in Quebec . 
with this background and in response to the Calgary Declaration , B.C. Premier Glen Clark appointed 12 citizens and 10 elected officials , MLAs and MPs from all parties , to the B.C. Unity Panel on October 25 , 1997 . 
co - chaired by John Kerr , a B.C. lumberman , and Alice McQuade , a teacher , the panel was charged with consulting British Columbians on B.C. ' s place within Canada and national unity using the Calgary framework as a starting point . 
in my experience , British Columbians have a much more vibrant , exciting , and inclusive sense of country than the claustrophobic , self - absorbing view of Canada conveyed by the central Canadian media . 
the Unity Panel poll results are encouraging in showing support for our union , but discouraging in reinforcing the tensions between B.C. and Ottawa . 
specifically , the poll shows there is a great deal of support for Quebec remaining in Canada . 
ninety per cent agreed that it is important to British Columbians that Quebec remain part of Canada . 
sixty - two per cent feel that the unique character of Quebec society , including the French - speaking majority and culture , is fundamental to the well - being of Canada . 
however , there is also a great deal of frustration in B.C. over our role in Confederation . 
forty - three per cent of those polled said B.C. receives less than its fair share of federal funding on transfers ; 37 per cent say B.C. does receive its share ; and 18 per cent have no opinion . 
that is , more than two - thirds of British Columbians feel we do not have our fair share of influence on federal decisions . 
eighty - six per cent agreed that the interests of British Columbians tend to be ignored in federal politics because most political parties are oriented towards central Canada . 
ninety per cent believe B.C. should have more seats in Parliament to suit its population size . 
we should note that B.C. , with half of Quebec ' s population , has 34 seats in the house , while Quebec has 75 . 
this is clearly inequitable . 
sixty - eight per cent of those polled believe the people who live outside Vancouver and Victoria tend to be ignored in provincial politics . 
i am pleased that the government has reversed that . 
another example is the " Mifflin Plan , " which has concentrated salmon fishing licences in the hands of large , urban - based producers and is destroying the economies of fishery - dependent coastal communities . 
provincial sentiment regarding the federal government ' s handling of the fishery was also reflected in the B.C. Unity Panel report . 
sixty - three per cent of respondents felt fisheries should come mainly under the control of the provincial government , 33 per cent felt it should be a federal jurisdiction , and only 4 per cent had no response . 
according to the report : 
fisheries was one area where there was almost total consensus in all sessions that the provincial government should take control . 
this was seen by many as a " classic example " of federal meddling in an area that only really affects people living on the coasts . 
most wanted some federal role in terms of international treaties , but they also felt that in so doing the federal government should be backing up the British Columbia government , not undermining it , as many felt was the case in the salmon dispute with the Americans . 
the findings of the panel were consistent in all regions of the province and across all demographic groups . 
i work mainly in the coastal constituencies , and it is interesting to me that this sentiment is also expressed up country . 
in fact , in the other place , Reform MP , Darrel Stinson , has tabled a private member ' s bill , Bill C - 237 , setting rules for the federal government to negotiate the separation of provincial districts that vote for secession in a province - wide vote . 
whatever our problems in the past , they pale before those we face in the future unless we can resolve some of our differences . 
creating a confederation , with all its problems , is a more hopeful process than destroying a confederation , which is one option we face . 
we are all aware of how close we came to this destruction with the last Quebec referendum in October 1995 , and the threat of another has our former Conservative leader , Jean Charest , joining Quebec ' s Liberals to fight for federalism and a united Canada . 
he told us : 
we need to confirm that partnership and to find a way to include Western Canadians and then to include Native Canadians . 
we must be able to stand together and to accept each other for what we are . 
he added , 
i have no doubt Canada will succeed . 
nor should we . 
i neglected to ask permission to table the B.C. Unity Panel Report on the Calgary Declaration . 
i wonder if I might have the consent of the chamber to do that . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
meeting of Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France - Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein rose pursuant to notice of April 28 , 1998 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the session of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly held in Strasbourg , France , from January 26 to 30 , 1998 . 
surely this was the case with respect to a series of remarkable speeches given in the immediate years following World War II by Sir Winston Churchill . 
Churchill , as you will recall , had been cast out as Prime Minister by the British electorate and was then Leader of the Opposition to the Labour Government in the English Parliament . 
before World War II , he had even considered taking on the presidency of the Pan - European Union , a popular movement to promote greater European unity . 
on March 5 , 1946 , he travelled to Fulton , Missouri with President Harry Truman to speak to Westminster College in a speech entitled " Sinews of Peace . " 
here , Churchill vividly described the growing Soviet encroachment in Europe . 
in this electrifying speech , he woke up a war - weary West when he coined the phrase " the Iron Curtain . " 
next , Churchill spoke in July , 1946 in Metz , France , and then in Zurich , Switzerland in September , 1946 , where he broached and expanded the theme of a united Europe , a " United States of Europe . " 
general Marshall credited the Zurich speech with influencing his own " Marshall Plan " announced a year later at Harvard University which led to European economic renewal . 
... the real demarcation between Europe and Asia is no chain of mountains , no natural frontier but a system of ideas and beliefs we call Western civilization . 
in the rich pattern of this culture , there are many strands ; the Hebrew belief in God ; the Christian message of compassion and redemption ; the Greek love of truth , beauty and goodness ; the Roman genius for law . 
Europe is a spiritual conception , but if men cease to hold that conception attained in Europe , Churchill said : 
... ancient nationalists fears and modern ideological factions distract and infuriate the unhappy , hungry populations . 
evil teachers earn the paying off of old scores with mathematical precision and false guides point to an unsparing retribution as a pathway to prosperity . 
is there to be no respite ? 
has Europe ' s mission come to an end ? 
Churchill then pointed out that the United Nations charter made direct provision for regional organizations . 
so he proposed a united Europe , as one major regional entity . 
he described a fact of European " realpolitik " : that there cannot be any foundation for European unity without France , Britain and Germany fused together in a true union of friendship . 
Churchill hoped to replace the ancient Roman declaration , Civus Romanus Sum , with a new declaration , " I am a European . " 
" what would be the physical and political boundaries of a united Europe ? " he asked . 
he then stated that it was not necessary to draw frontier lines but rather " smooth them away . " 
he sought to exclude no state whose territories lie within the amorphous boundaries of Europe which assures its people of fundamental rights and liberties , leaving the door open for some who will come sooner and others later . 
hence Churchill promoted the renovation of a spiritual Europe , an idea of Europe with larger allegiance than to the nation state . 
he hoped that the creation of a healthy and contented Europe would be in the first and truest interests of the then militant Soviet Union . 
in a way , he was discarding the old balance of paradigm that lay at the heart of British foreign policy with Britain siding first with one power , then another , to sustain a political equilibrium in Europe . 
a united Europe was to be crafted in a new and different vessel of peaceful cohesion to replace the old cauldron of Europe . 
then , in 1948 , at the Congress of Europe held in the Hague , a direct precursor to the Council of Europe , Churchill spoke again about the progress that had been made in the few short years since the Second World War . 
with the advent of the Marshall Plan , with most Western European nations as part of the European Union , he noted at the centre of the European unity stands the idea of a Charter of Human Rights guarded by freedom and sustained by law , sustained by the rule of law . 
it was impossible , he declared , to separate economics and defence from the general political structure . 
mutual aid in the economic field and joint military defence must inevitably be accompanied step by step with the parallel policy of closer political unity . 
finally , in 1949 , at Strasbourg - where Charlemagne had been crowned over a millennium earlier - at the first meeting of the Council of Europe , he looked around the packed hall of distinguished delegations and , in the midst of his speech , demanded : 
where are the Germans ? 
the Germans were immediately invited to attend . 
Churchill ' s comments were both visionary and startling for their accuracy . 
now , honourable senators , we have the Council of Europe in Strasbourg composed of states that stretch from Ireland on the Atlantic in the west to the Russian Federation on the Pacific in the east . 
the present council , composed of delegates from 41 states , meets regularly as a grand Parliament for the new Europe . 
to observe the clash between personalities , parties and policies is both fascinating and compelling . 
the new idea of Europe is emerging . 
canada holds status as an official observer allowing Canada to fully participate in parliamentary committees and the plenary , save with respect to the vote and as a governmental observer to the council ' s permanent structures . 
it seems that our friends to the south , the United States Congress , prefers not to participate in the parliamentary forum because they do not have a vote . 
an interesting aspect is found in the selection of the influential chairs of the committees where much of the work is done . 
chairs of these key committees are selected by party affiliation . 
all delegates are divided across borders into political groupings including Conservative , Liberal , Social Democrats . 
party standings are aggregated in national elections and these results determine the allocation of these chairs for each of the political groupings . 
for example , the Education and Culture Committee is chaired by Lord Russell Johnson , an avuncular and witty English Liberal lord , who also happened to be the elected head of the Liberal political group at the council . 
an all - party agreement reached a few years ago also rotates key positions , from Assembly President to the Secretary General . 
the next President , anticipated in 1999 , will most likely be a Liberal , the same Lord Russell Johnson who now heads the Liberal grouping at Strasbourg . 
for those of us who have spent some part of our lives trying to explain the invisible if invaluable contribution of party and political caucuses as a way of obtaining coherent policy positions within each political party , it was refreshing to see that the Council of Europe had determined that this remained the best methodology to facilitate debate and resolution in a democratic fashion . 
we read little of this in the official journals of the Council of Europe , but party politics remains the invisible sinews of democracy and political cohesion . 
at the Council of Europe , your Canadian delegation tabled a resolution urging swift ratification of the Canada - led Anti - Personnel Land Mines Treaty . 
again , party affiliation came into play . 
at a meeting of the Liberal group , we were quickly able to obtain signatures of 20 delegates ranging from Ireland to Russia in order to quickly place that resolution on the council ' s official agenda for consideration later by a committee . 
committee study and recommendation is a pre - condition for debate in the plenary and hopefully for approval . 
honourable senators , I urge Canada to widen , deepen and thicken our relations with the Council of Europe . 
if we wish Canada to continue to partake in a significant role in the peace , prosperity and trade of that region of the globe , we must be at the table where we are welcome . 
there , a new Europe is rising where interests of borderless community and civil society outweigh sovereignty . 
from the husks of 20 th - century Europe , we can see the democratic outlines of Eurasia emerging and filling the vacuum left by the Cold War . 
w ( 1500 ) 
i was delighted that a Council of Europe forum , organized in Ottawa last month , was attended by many senators in this chamber , and by leaders of the council and their executive , to explore questions of mutual interest . 
i hope this dialogue intensifies so that Canada can play an even greater , more useful role in all aspects of the work of the Council of Europe . 
this dialogue ties together the varied strands of the diverse interests of both Canada and Europe . 
we share more in common than most realize . 
it is sad to note , however , that while Canada is most excellently represented by our ambassador to Switzerland , Ambassador Frenette , Canada maintains no permanent representative at the council in Strasbourg itself . 
just as a footnote , Japan , which has no official observer status there , has 21 full - time people located in Strasbourg to represent their interests . 
too much affecting Canada ' s national interests , from asbestos to refugee policies , is happening daily in Strasbourg for us not to be there . 
this is not the time for false economies . 
sometimes we differ in principle with our European colleagues . 
on refugees , for example , Canadians believe in absorption , quick absorption , of our refugees . 
Europeans believe in a malingering " temporary status " for their refugees . 
as a consequence , political problems fester , compound and proliferate in Europe . 
Europeans could learn the quantifiable economic and social benefits from our refugee policies of quick absorption . 
honourable senators , is it not time for our global interests of trade and foreign policies to be matched by more representation on the ground in Europe ? 
how can we hope to diversify our trade and investment , now so heavily dependent on North America , without greater muscle on the bone , on the ground in Europe . 
with the coming of the euro next year , and the softening of Asian markets , there will be an inevitable tilt in the balance of global trade , investment and power towards Europe . 
canada should be there . 
canada must be there . 
let us start at the Council of Europe . 
honourable senators , as we speak , the council ' s economic committee and your Canadian delegation are planning a bilateral colloquium this year in Canada to study NAFTA and Europe ' s trade relations . 
your delegation has also fostered in Strasbourg and Ottawa the outlines of a five - point action plan . 
the leadership on all of these issues can be attributed to the head of our Canadian delegation , the ever - astute , articulate and assiduous Honourable Charles Caccia of the other place . 
honourable senators , there is much work to be done . 
the government must move . 
Europe is moving ; so must we . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 56 
Thursday , April 30 , 1998 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Honourable Richard J . Stanbury 
tributes on Retirement 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
fisheries and Oceans 
misuse of Funds Earmarked for Assistance to Displaced West Coast Fishermen 
Israel 
fiftieth Anniversary of Establishment as State 
visitor in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
tobacco Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
privacy Commissioner 
reappointment of Present Incumbent 
adjournment 
social Housing Programs 
aboriginal Volunteer Organizations 
notice of Motion to Urge Government to Reinstate Funding 
west Coast Fisheries 
effect of Federal Policies on Coastal Communities - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
north American Free Trade Agreement 
softwood Lumber Agreement - United States Trade Action on Pre - Drilled Studs - Government Position 
Canadian Heritage 
suitability of New Commissioners Appointed to Canadian Radio - Television and Telecommunications Commission - Government Position 
national Defence 
acquisition of New Equipment for Armed Forces - Government Police 
possibility of Establishing Standing Committee on Defence - Government Position 
national Finance 
access of Parliament to Evaluations of Policies and Programs of Department of Finance - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permits for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa - Government Position 
national Defence 
request for Answers to Order Paper Questions 
orders OF THE DAY 
royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Thursday , April 30 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Honourable Richard J . Stanbury 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , 30 years ago , in the magic of a hopeful spring , Pierre Elliott Trudeau won the leadership of the Liberal Party of Canada . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
on that same day , my old and very special friend , Senator Richard Stanbury , became the party ' s national president . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
that was a time when the euphoria of Canada ' s centennial lingered across the length and breadth of the federation . 
in a world where Kennedy ' s Camelot had ended with an assassin ' s bullets , Pierre Trudeau ' s vision of a just society renewed and inspired the nation . 
it was in such a time that Dick Stanbury , then a young , successful Toronto lawyer , an officer and organizer of the Presbyterian Church in Canada , chairman of local hospital and library fund - raising campaigns , already zealous about political organization , with the soul and the conscience of an idealist and a reformer in politics , refined and shaped his ardent advocacy of participatory democracy and his life - long commitment to the inclusion of people of all walks of life in the political process . 
he has devoted his life to promoting moderation , tolerance and flexibility in public life . 
he has fought against indifference , the kind of indifference which is the dry rot of our democratic freedoms . 
the politics of inclusion became his life ' s work - the politics of inclusion from the bottom up , the politics of inclusion of all citizens in the honourable practice of service to community , region and country . 
it was only natural that his passion for egalitarianism and tolerance , for compassion and human rights , would take root in the soil of Liberal International . 
senator Stanbury was the leading advocate behind the eventual decision to apply for full membership in Liberal International . 
in that international forum , he helped expand upon the idealistic yet pragmatic multilateralist convictions of Lester Pearson , Senator Stanbury ' s mentor and friend . 
i might add that all of us who have had the privilege of meeting under the umbrella of Liberal International have learned from one another and formed bonds of trust , linkages which enriched us not only as private citizens in our home countries , but also as citizens of the world . 
Dick , in many ways we have you to thank for this . 
in those days , I had the pleasure and the privilege of attending many meetings with Senator Stanbury , His Honour Speaker Molgat and others . 
as Liberal International has grown to include representatives from many of the new and emerging democracies , the meaning and the significance of these forums have intensified . 
the citizens of the new democracies know that indifference , intransigence , and paralysis are the gravest threats to freedom . 
senator Stanbury , these are things that you have always understood and , in many ways , these are timeless truths about honour and service , and fair - mindedness and generosity . 
wherever you went , you helped in very significant ways , at the grass - roots level , to foster democracy and Liberal values , to plant the seeds of freedom in countries as diverse as post - Franco Spain and Sandanista Nicaragua . 
today , Canada takes a leading role in the discussions about a free trade agreement for the whole western hemisphere . 
twenty - five years ago , Canadian products simply were not to be found in many parts of the world . 
senator Stanbury took a leading role in changing all that . 
he personally identified potential markets , learned as much as he could about them , and met with officials around the world to establish trade relations and export markets for Canadians in Latin America , South East Asia , the Far East , India and the Middle East . 
honourable senators , Dick Stanbury pursued this remarkable and eclectic career - as president of the Liberal Party of Canada , as personal advocate for international trade promotion missions in Liberal International - while working diligently here in the Senate over three of the most critical decades in the life of this nation . 
as the record shows , during this time , he chaired and served on several important standing and special committees . 
from time to time , he acted as Deputy Leader of the Government and as Acting Speaker . 
it was once said that a statesman is a politician who places himself at the service of the nation . 
senator Stanbury is indeed a statesman of the highest order , yet he has always remained one of the most modest , unassuming men ever to grace this chamber , renowned for consistently and tirelessly answering the calls of those who needed him , whether they were prime ministers or the poor , whether they were Canadians looking for new markets or little people across the planet who were struggling for democracy . 
i can only think of one time when he asked for a somewhat lightened load of duties , and that was four years ago . 
senator Fairbairn would well remember this . 
he had just celebrated his fiftieth wedding anniversary , and he wanted to spend more time with his wife , Marg . 
Marg is with us in the gallery today , along with their two daughters Jane and Sally and their extended family . 
we all take this opportunity to thank you , Marg , because your wonderful partnership has been the heart and soul of the important career to which we pay tribute today , a career which has never lost the passion and idealism of that magic springtime 30 years ago when euphoria graced the land from coast to coast and everything seemed possible . 
Dick , you will always be remembered here for your unfailing advocacy of the best things in life . 
you will be remembered for your devotion to this institution , for the wonderful warmth of your smile , and for your enduring friendship in good times and in bad . 
over the years , if anyone ever wanted to look for the ideal senator , they could not find a better model than Dick Stanbury . 
in every way , the road map of Dick ' s life has been a matter of inspiration to his friends , his colleagues , and his country . 
it is a road - map that all of us here will be privileged to study , to reflect upon , and to honour for many years to come . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
while we have gained a few , the overall balance seems to have shifted away from that profession . 
we are losing quite a distinguished lawyer today , one of long experience whose skills and judgment have been an asset to the worlds of business , international trade , civic associations and , happily , in the work of Parliament , of the Senate , and of its committees . 
on points of order and parliamentary procedure , Senator Stanbury has built more bricks out of straw than almost anyone I know . 
his forensic skills will certainly be missed in those debates by the beleaguered Liberal leadership . 
his ability to make bricks out of straw may also have helped when he was a member of the Presbyterian Church building committee . 
i do not know about that , but it brings me to another point . 
with the departure in recent years of Heath Macquarrie and before that of George McIlraith and now of Senator Stanbury , the Senate is running out of Presbyterians at an alarming rate . 
i trust , therefore , that you who are taking notes for the Prime Minister will let him know that the vacancy about to be created should be filled by an outstanding lawyer , preferably an active Presbyterian , as Senator Stanbury has been ; an elder in his own congregation and a member of the committee on international affairs of the Presbyterian Church of Canada . 
there is one other qualification that is hardly necessary to mention - that is , that the seat be filled by a Liberal . 
when Dick Stanbury greeted Pierre Elliott Trudeau as the new leader of the Liberal Party , he did not make the mistake of a later Liberal president who declared that the candidate who had finished second was first in the hearts of Liberals . 
that is probably as it should be , and it is certainly in the Liberal tradition , as we saw earlier this week in the House of Commons . 
senator Stanbury has been in every way a real asset to the Liberal Party , to the legislative process , to the policy process here , and to politics in this country . 
the Liberal Party is fortunate to have had him . 
parliament is fortunate to have had the benefit of his commitment , his experience , his informed judgment , and his service . 
he has been a most convivial and agreeable companion , and I and many others here will greatly miss his presence . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , is there something in the soil or the air of Southwestern Ontario that breeds Grits , particularly true Grits ? 
i can think of the most famous offshoot , Kenneth Galbraith , and I can think of a family equally famous in Liberal circles , the Stanburys , father and sons , Judge Standbury , Dick and Bob . 
there , one evening in 1961 , I attended my first 
liberal meeting for the purpose of organizing a young Liberal association in that riding . 
Dick was previously the president of the York Centre Liberal Association and had been elected president of the Toronto and York Liberal Association . 
he was as good as his word . 
that evening , at my first meeting , I was elected president of the Young Liberals Association of York Centre . 
from that time , Dick and I became fast friends . 
months later , I was elected president of the Toronto District Young Liberal Association and I became a member of his executive . 
then , only months later , Dick and I were to serve on the National Liberal Campaign Committee after I became an officer of the National Young Liberals . 
Dick himself had risen from president of the Toronto and District Young Liberal Association to chair of the National Policy Committee of the Liberal Party , and then on to the presidency of the National Liberal Party of Canada . 
he served with great distinction and great respect in that capacity in the late 1960 s and early 1970 s . 
optimism . 
nothing could be so dark or disastrous that would befall the Liberal Party , or its personalities , that could not , with coolness and clarity , be turned around . 
Dick was the coolest in the party , particularly when personalities or policies were in disarray or encountered deep difficulties . 
Dick was not a sudden flash in the pan . 
Dick had started at the grass - roots and , by hard work and dedication and optimism , became an invaluable force in Canada . 
it is not in his nature . 
it is in his nature to appeal to the best , rather than the worst , in people and politics . 
Dick was always strong at the grass - roots , strong in his community in serving on library boards and hospital boards , strong in his chosen profession , strong in his church in serving as an elder in positions of the Presbyterian Church , strong in business affairs , strong in international commercial relations in Europe and in Asia , and always strong in every aspect of the work here in the Senate . 
despite personal trauma in his family , Dick and his wonderful and ever - cheerful helpmate , Marg , overcame all with optimism and equanimity . 
Dick was one of the spark - plugs for a small group of volunteers in Toronto that became the centre of power in the Liberal Party in the 1960 s . 
his work led to the revival of the Liberal Party . 
Dick led in reform , from election expenses to policy on Medicare . 
i believe it was during his term as party policy chairman that Medicare was introduced in Parliament in 1966 . 
Dick ' s small group included our former senatorial colleagues Keith Davey , Royce Frith and others . 
they believed in Mr. Pearson , they believed in the Liberal Party and , with unflinching dedication , they built Toronto and district into one of the finest and fairest political machines in the country . 
Dick provided leadership on questions of national unity . 
Dick always insisted on policies of inclusion , opening the party at the grass - roots to new faces , new voices , newcomers from Europe , Asia , South America , and Africa , all reflecting the changing demographics and profile of Toronto . 
he led on multiculturalism . 
honourable senators , nowhere in our written Constitution do we see reference to the invisible sinews of democracy , party politics . 
Dick Stanbury spent more than half a century engaged modestly and honourably in party politics ; in particular , with the Liberal Party . 
he remains a model for us all . 
to those of us in Toronto , Dick and Marg will remain Mr. and Mrs. Liberal . 
to Dick and Marg , may you both be blessed with many years of activity and action . 
to you and your family , the best is yet to come . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , the son of a judge , Richard Stanbury seemed destined for a career in law . 
on becoming a lawyer , he went into private practice . 
after a few years , he was appointed to the Senate in 1968 by Prime Minister Lester B . Pearson and stayed with us for 30 years . 
naturally , Senator Stanbury was appointed to the Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
it is there that I have seen him at work , since my arrival in the Senate , almost ten years ago . 
on this committee , he served as member , chairman , vice - chairman , member and again vice - chairman . 
his experience in private practice served him exceptionally well , both in the Senate and in all its committees . 
as a jurist and lawyer , he always asked especially well - crafted questions of the expert witnesses regularly invited to appear before the Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , which , as honourable senators know , sits quite often and is always very interesting . 
he leaves us today , at the culmination of a very interesting and highly productive career as a lawyer and a senator . 
we wish him a wonderful retirement . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , like so many in this house today , I am very sad to reach the moment when we must say farewell to Richard Stanbury . 
he will be truly missed , especially by me , and his career will always remain an example of the finest kind of contribution an individual can bring to this institution . 
indeed , for those who so carelessly choose to demean the quality and the character of senators generally , they would do well to take a look at the outstanding record of Dick Stanbury in this place over the past 30 years . 
he is a man of both kindness and strength in principle , integrity and judgment , with a fundamental commitment to hard work . 
this has been clearly evident in his 40 years as a respected lawyer in Toronto , in his constant faith and support for his church , the Presbyterian Church of Canada , and in his reconstruction work , which Senator Grafstein has outlined for us in vivid terms , with his chosen political party , the Liberal Party , particularly during those difficult times in the 1950 s , and early 1960 s when he became legendary in the Toronto and district area and far beyond . 
he made astounding efforts to strengthen our party and its new leader . 
he took our party outside the borders of this country to broaden its involvement through membership in Liberal International . 
those special qualities were clearly evident following his appointment to the Senate in 1968 . 
throughout the years , he has shown an unfailing respect for this institution and its committees , on subjects as diverse as the Constitution of our country , the broad issue of conflict of interest , and the rules and procedures of this chamber . 
he was a formidable and exceedingly good - humoured chairman of The Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , and certainly an enormous help to me when I first sat on that committee as a new senator many years ago . 
Dick Stanbury has also reached far beyond Parliament Hill to help develop business councils and trade relations with a variety of countries around the world , either on his own or with the support of government , or through the parliamentary process . 
honourable senators , at the core of all of this has been his partnership with his beloved Marg and their joint delight in their family , which remains the rock on which all else is built . 
for me , Dick has been a mentor and a friend since I first met him some 30 years ago , and that friendship will never end . 
i admire him tremendously , and I should like to thank him publicly today for the steady and sound advice he gave so generously to me when I had the privilege of being Leader of the Government in the Senate , and also his wise counsel on the occasions when he cheerfully assisted as deputy leader . 
it is quite true , as Senator Graham said , that after careful thought , Dick sought not a disengagement from the Senate but a lightening of the load , which we very generously were prepared to agree to until the next difficulty arose . 
Dick , as always , responded to the call without question . 
as I say , his advice to me made my job at the time a great deal easier . 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I rise today to pay tribute to the Honourable Richard Stanbury on the occasion of his retirement as a senator from the great province of Ontario . 
as has been stated before , Senator Stanbury was appointed to this chamber over 30 years ago by Prime Minister Pearson . 
at the moment , I believe he is the third longest - serving member of this Senate . 
my personal knowledge of Senator Stanbury goes back over all those years . 
while I was toiling away in the service of then Progressive Conservative leader Robert Stanfield , he was serving in the Senate . 
as well , he was president of the Liberal Party of Canada for the first five years of his Senate career . 
at the same time , he practised law and very actively supported worthy causes in his community and in his church . 
in other words , he has led - and still leads - a full and active life . 
senator Stanbury , as we have just heard from many speakers , is partisan , as am I - as are many of us - and I say , good for us . 
i am afraid , honourable senators , that because of this partisanship we would not be considered worthy by the present Leader of the Opposition in the other place who , in his piousness and self - righteousness , refers to this place as " defective and fraudulently constructed from the very beginning . " 
i guess only Preston Manning is qualified to make such judgments . 
in a mean - spirited , vitriolic speech in the other place , he checked off a list of various sins of members of this chamber , such as being political fund - raisers , party presidents and premiers . 
in order to satisfy the Leader of the Opposition ' s tenet - in addition to all our other qualities which he studiously overlooked - we must seek penance for having supported , or for continuing to support , a political party . 
one wonders how he ever brought himself to forgive his father , the late Senator Ernest Manning , for agreeing to be associated with such a den of iniquity . 
senator Stanbury , your colleagues on both sides of this chamber celebrate your contribution to this country , to your community and your legal practice , and particularly in the Senate , as has been so eloquently stated by the Leader of the Government in the Senate , my colleague Senator Murray and other senators . 
when I first joined the ranks of this place in June of 1993 , there were some very hard feelings around , and some went out of their way to make me feel most unwelcome . 
you , Senator Stanbury , were not one of those . 
i now wish to acknowledge this , and thank you very much . 
senator Stanbury , may I join my colleagues in this place in wishing you well as you pursue your next set of challenges , whatever they may be . 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
honourable senators , down through history , westerners have been known from time to time to have suggested that they are not understood by the rest of the country , particularly by Torontonians and by other Ontarians . 
as a British Columbian , I wish to place on record that Senator Stanbury is one Canadian who understands what Canada is all about . 
Dick Stanbury is liked and admired from sea to sea to sea . 
during his entire career , he has worked with us in the Province of British Columbia to explain B.C. problems to Ottawa more effectively , and he has always been an understanding ally of western aspirations . 
senator St. Germain : 
do not let him retire ! 
senator Perrault : 
we would love to have him stay . 
even my friendly B.C. opponent from the Conservative Party agrees with what I am saying about our colleague Senator Stanbury . 
senator Stanbury has persuaded so many people to pursue careers in public life during his time as a worker for his party . 
i think he must have enlisted or enticed thousands of people to run as Liberals . 
happily , most of those subsequent campaigns were successful . 
more than a few of Senator Stanbury ' s recruits are in this chamber today . 
senator Stanbury has been a wonderful , inventive , active and intelligent force in the Liberal Party . 
senator Stanbury and Marg are two great Canadians who have played an active role in helping to build the nation . 
a few weeks ago , Allan MacEachen said : " One of the most ridiculous votes I ever cast in my life was to make Senate retirement mandatory at the age of 75 . 
i wish we had that vote over again . " 
is it not ironic and incredible that here we have Senator Stanbury , at the very height of his powers , being required to leave the chamber ? 
i know that our parties could evolve some intelligent solutions in this respect , Senator St. Germain . 
senator St. Germain : 
we will . 
senator Perrault : 
it would be marvellous . 
the event we are celebrating today is not a celebration but an opportunity for us to express our thanks for all that Dick Stanbury has done for this country , for the Senate , for the parliamentary system , for the political process , and to hope that he will continue his work in many other capacities as he takes his retirement . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
at that time , I think Senator Stanbury was the vice - chairman and Senator Nurgitz was the chairman . 
i found Dick Stanbury to be not only charming , intelligent , compassionate and gracious , but also wise . 
that experience I will never really forget . 
my colleague Senator Lowell Murray is very generous with his advice as to who should be appointed to the Senate . 
i had not realized that that was one of his magical powers . 
he has the ability to do that for the Conservative Party and also for the Liberal Party . 
however , I must say for myself that I will only be happy with the appointment of a clone of Senator Stanbury . 
otherwise , I will not be pleased . 
i simply want to say , in the words of a popular song : 
like a comet flashing across the midnight sky , gone too soon . 
like a rainbow just before it dies , gone too soon . 
senator Stanbury , you are gone too soon . 
hon. Dan Hays : 
honourable senators , I think everything that can be said has been said about Richard Stanbury , however , I would like to add my words of congratulation on a remarkable career here and outside this place . 
as Senator LeBreton said , he is a fierce partisan . 
he presided over his party as did Senator St. Germain , Senator Graham , Senator Molgat , and as I have done . 
i closely identify with him and with them because of the travail of that kind of position . 
it takes a great deal of patience . 
if we judge from the results of Senator Stanbury ' s efforts , as a Liberal activist in Toronto , as party president , and as a senator , we must find that he has been one of the most successful partisans in our history . 
as we have heard , he is also a successful non - partisan in his role as an internationalist in his community , in his church , and as a member of the Ontario Bar . 
on behalf of those who closely identify with you , as they did when you were an officer of the party , I would simply say : 
congratulations . 
we wish you well . 
we are happy to see you leave the Senate in vigorous good health . 
to you , Marg and your family , all of the best . 
we look forward to seeing you as often as possible . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Jacques H é bert : 
honourable senators , in principle , I tend to be against this strange habit we have of showering praise on senators who are retiring . 
i take this opportunity to beg my colleagues - the friends and the others - from sparing me this ordeal when my turn comes to retire a few weeks from now . 
the funniest thing in all this is that I rise to contravene the very principle I have just stated . 
even for the most highly esteemed of my colleagues , I almost systematically refrained from adding my little stream of praise to the collective flood of heartfelt tributes . 
today , I put my personal principles aside for a moment because , if I miss this chance , Richard Stanbury will never know what I think of him . 
Richard Stanbury , every member of this house has the greatest admiration for you , as well as great respect , and I second without any hesitation all the compliments you have just been showered with , in both official languages . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
his children are , of course , also very important because they produced those grandchildren of whom he is so very proud . 
it is to those granddaughters that I would like to address a few remarks . 
how lucky you are that you have grandparents who are so young and vital . 
it is my wish that they continue to be young and vital so , along with your parents , Dick and Marg Stanbury can guide you through those somewhat difficult and tumultuous years of being a teenager . 
i know they have already provided you with great guidance along the way , even , I understand , some help with you French on occasion . 
i would also like to remind you that the most important decision that you will ever make in your life is the choice of a life partner . 
these two people who we are honouring this afternoon made that choice , I understand , at the ripe old age of 15 when Dickie and Marg had their first date and they brought that to its conclusion when they were merely 21 . 
in October of this year they will celebrate their 54 th wedding anniversary . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Carstairs : 
i would remind the young women in the gallery that , if they are lucky enough to find a life partner for 54 years , they will indeed be most fortunate Canadians . 
the most important person in your lives , in addition to parents and grandparents , will be a mentor , someone who , when you embark on a new occupation will come to you and offer you help , support and guidance . 
that is what your grandfather has been to every single Liberal on this side of the chamber , including me . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Carstairs : 
shortly after I arrived here , he made it clear that he was there with an open heart and an open hand . 
as the weeks went by , he was always saying to me , " It is so good to have you here , " to make me feel that I was making a contribution . 
you are very lucky to have your grandmother and your grandfather . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , in all the speeches you have heard , the underlying concept not voiced enough is that this is a man who inspires trust and deserves it . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , after hearing Senator H é bert saying that he generally does not approve of these testimonials , I decided to say a few kind words about my friend Senator Stanbury . 
i shall keep Senator H é bert ' s comments in mind when our next retirees are being honoured . 
senator Stanbury has been a good friend for 35 years . 
i met him when I was in the Young Liberals . 
he was chairman and president of the party . 
he helped me when I was in the House of Commons . 
everything nice has been said about you , sir , except no one mentioned that you are also an expert in an area where the government needs a lot of expertise , and that is in dealing with the Middle East , and especially with the Arab world . 
that has escaped notice today , but I know it is in your biography and , if you included it there , I know it is because you feel it is very important . 
you understand the meaning of a close relationship with the Middle East . 
i am sure Senator Stanbury , as I am , is very upset by the decision taken by City Hall last night to refuse to allow Saudi Arabia to build their embassy in Ottawa . 
they did so for all kinds of reasons , some admissible in public and some not . 
i learned from you the importance of learning when travelling around the world . 
perhaps that advice is something Senator Stanbury can share with us and others in the future since he will now have more time . 
i wish you the best , sir . 
you are a fine gentlemen . 
you have been very encouraging to young members of Parliament . 
in your kind and gentle ways , you and your wife have always been extremely helpful . 
on behalf of all those who may not be in a position to do so today I thank you , as well as on my own behalf . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Richard J . Stanbury : 
honourable senators , this is too much . 
had I known you thought so much of me , I would have lied about my age . 
i am so grateful to Senator Graham and all the others who expressed such wonderful thoughts this afternoon . 
it is hard for me to absorb them . 
i made a terrible mistake . 
i said to someone that no attention is paid to retirements from the Senate , that the next day life goes on in the same way . 
i resisted having my family come today because I thought there would be nothing to it , that I would just be here , and then I would be gone . 
i was certainly wrong , and I do appreciate all the wonderful comments that have been made this afternoon . 
i have had mixed feelings about my retirement . 
i have loved the 30 years that I have been here with you and your predecessors - and there have been many predecessors over that 30 years . 
while I have enjoyed that thoroughly and will greatly miss the friendships I have made here , I will be delighted to have more time with my dear wife of almost 54 years , with whom I have been " keeping company " for 60 years , and my daughters , sons - in - law , and four delightful grandchildren who are all wonderful , and are well represented in the gallery today . 
you have already been introduced to Marg several times . 
she travelled with me all across Canada while I was president of the party . 
she travelled with me across the world while I was doing trade work . 
she was never just a passenger ; she always took part in everything , and added her own special interests and her own special charm . 
frankly , Canada has been extremely fortunate to have Marg Stanbury as a marvellous ambassador of goodwill . 
hon. Senators : 
hear hear ! 
senator Stanbury : 
my daughter , Jane Baynham , who is a teacher , is here from Vancouver with her daughter Kelsey . 
her husband , Brian Baynham , is a senior counsel in Vancouver , who is known to a number of you . 
Kelsey is wearing a dress that she made herself , with a little help from Grandma Marg . 
young David , my nine - year - old grandson , had to stay in Vancouver to participate in a play , which is even more important than being in Ottawa today . 
our younger daughter , Sally Day , and her husband , John Day , are here , with their daughters Jen and Jackie . 
in addition to being a lawyer in Toronto , John is also the Chancellor of the Ecclesiastical Province of Ontario of the Anglican Church . 
we are not all Presbyterians . 
John has taken a very senior post in that organization . 
their daughter Jen , who is 16 , intends to be an astronaut . 
Jackie is two years younger and she is already determined to be a pediatrician . 
they both have the character and the intellect which ensures that they will follow through with those endeavours . 
i am delighted to have such a lovely group of family here to honour me today and to introduce to you . 
thanks to the late Right Honourable Lester B . Pearson , for the past 30 years I have had the opportunity to be not only an observer but a participant in the legislative life of our country . 
for me , honourable senators , this has been the greatest privilege of my life . 
when I was co - chairman of the first Special Joint Committee on Conflict of Interest , we began our report by observing : 
service to the Canadian public has always been the highest calling of a Canadian citizen . 
i grew up knowing that to be true . 
it was one of the strongest teachings that my parents impressed upon each of their eight children . 
it really is the touchstone of our democracy . 
we too often forget the free gift of democracy that has come from our forefathers . 
in the last ten years , there has been a revolution of democracy in the international landscape . 
we have seen whole nations rise up and , with great pain and personal sacrifice , transform their countries into democracies with market - based economies . 
anyone in Eastern Europe or Latin America will tell you that this has not been easy . 
it is an ongoing struggle , but it has been worthwhile because it is only in a democracy that a government , by its very essence , must manifest fundamental equality and respect for its citizens . 
sadly , however , the simple overthrow of absolute governments does not ensure continuing democracy . 
a vibrant democracy needs a vibrant political life . 
it needs citizens to engage themselves on issues , to inform themselves , to speak their minds , and to become involved with their communities at all levels . 
if there is one issue to which I tried to devote myself during these years of public life , it has been to encourage Canadians to get involved . 
participatory democracy , the idea of organized forums where people can have direct input on policy matters , is now well accepted . 
it arrived on the Canadian scene within my political lifetime and was a cause very dear to my heart . 
democracies are not one - dimensional ; they are created and sustained by a myriad of driving forces , some directly elected by the people , others not , but still accountable through our democratic structure to the citizenry they serve , and to whom they speak . 
the Senate is one of those bodies prescribed by our Constitution . 
honourable senators , our relevance depends not upon how we got here , but upon what we do when we are here . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Stanbury : 
in the legislative field , our contribution is , and has been for generations , unsurpassed . 
so many democracies throughout the world and throughout the ages have had two legislative bodies in order to provide different perspectives on the laws to ensure that each law is the best possible for the purpose . 
in studying draft legislation , our task is to look into the future and anticipate problems that may arise , to have the judgment to assess those problems and the wisdom to be able to find the right solutions . 
we must be able to see more than just the words on the pages of a bill ; we must see the flesh - and - blood human concern that is behind them . 
to accomplish that , we in this chamber must bring to this task a diversity of experience in Canadian and international affairs ; a diversity that must be carefully maintained by each prime minister in making new appointments to this chamber . 
fortunately , we have had , through the years , leaders from the political life of this country , really the experts in the machinery of democracy - individuals who have led their provinces or their cities , who have represented constituencies in the other place , and individuals who have conceived , organized and carried out almost every electoral campaign in Canadian history . 
each member brings a wealth of practical knowledge and experience that enables him or her to welcome and understand the concerns of able witnesses before our committees , to understand the problems that may arise , and to craft solutions with the confidence that they can work . 
honourable senators , this chamber makes a very valuable contribution to the people of Canada . 
the Senate ' s studies on national issues by special committees have been universally respected . 
they are cheaper , shorter and more productive than other forms of inquiry . 
i have always believed , as Senator LeBreton said , that the most effective tool of democracy and the best vehicle for participatory democracy is the political party . 
there can be no democracy without political parties . 
in the Senate , however , our partisanship should be limited to honest differences of policy opinion . 
a good argument based on policy differences never did a democracy any harm . 
it is the abuse of that process which brings Parliament into disrepute . 
i have been very favourably impressed by the recent appointments to this chamber , not only those made by the Right Honourable Jean Chr é tien but also many made by the Right Honourable Brian Mulroney . 
i must single out , in particular , the contributions being made by the many women recently appointed to this chamber . 
without question , the Senate is a vastly different place from what it was 30 years ago . 
it is fresher , with renewed energy and direction , and it will be better yet as the renewal continues . 
Duncan Jessiman , Jacques H é bert and Philippe Gigant è s will follow soon . 
i cannot omit to mention the recent loss of Senators John Macdonald and Gerald Ottenheimer . 
i notice on the seniority list in the rotunda that only the names of Orville Phillips and Herb Sparrow appear above mine . 
Orville was appointed by Prime Minister Diefenbaker , and Herb and I were sworn in on the same day in 1968 , with Sydney Smith as the Speaker and John Connolly as the Leader of the Government . 
both Orville and Herb are much younger than I , so they are now the deans of the Senate . 
i would like to say a few words on national unity . 
when I was appointed to the Senate in 1968 , my French was very limited , like that of so many other Canadians outside Quebec at the time . 
i knew my part of the country inside out , but I knew little of Canada ' s other regions . 
everything has changed so much in the past 30 years . 
we often had a hard time understanding each other . 
we certainly have not resolved all our misunderstandings , but I think we have made huge progress in recognizing our problems and looking for solutions together . 
these days , throughout Canada , people switch back and forth easily from one language to the other . 
as a nation , we want to protect and strengthen our two languages and two cultures . 
it is the commitment , respect and admiration we have for each other that best defines the spirit of Canada . 
i love the Quebec in Quebecers , but we are so much richer in our regional entities as a people living together and building Canada . 
we have an opportunity to make our mark in history , to be a country deeply rooted in rich cultures drawing heavily on its plurality , its tolerance and its respect in order to look to the future united . 
before I conclude , I wish to thank my assistants over the years , without whom my work here would not have been the same . 
imagine , in 30 years , just three wonderful secretaries : 
Muriel Gordon , who is in the gallery ; and , before she joined me , Anne Kerr and Denise Dixon . 
Andrew Kavchak , Craig Bedford and Barbara Kagedan . 
they have all been talented , conscientious and insightful people . 
we are all indebted to our Clerk , our table officers , our Black Rod and administrative officers , our reporters and translators , our pages , and other workers who support us in our work every day . 
i thank them for the help they have given to me over the years . 
i should like to thank those members with whom I had the privilege of working on that committee , and in particular those members who chaired it so very capably over the years : 
Jacques Flynn , Nate Nurgitz , Joan Neiman , G é rald Beaudoin , Sharon Carstairs , and Lorna Milne . 
i would also like to thank the government and opposition leaders through these many years , all of whom have shown me nothing but courtesy . 
i want to make particular mention of Joyce Fairbairn . 
she was our leader during a very difficult period . 
being a government leader and cabinet minister with responsibility for passage of government legislation when you have no majority in the house must be the ultimate test of a politician , and I am sure Senator Murray will agree with that . 
on many occasions , of course , Senator Fairbairn had the benefit of our colleague Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s understanding of that responsibility , but also , of course , it was not beneath John to cause Joyce a good deal of anxiety from time to time . 
she stood up to the strain beautifully , and we are all proud of her . 
our Speaker deserves an Oscar for his perfect performance in presiding over our deliberations . 
Gil Molgat has also become one of our most distinguished senior diplomats . 
he and Allison have done us proud all over the world and in hosting visiting dignitaries here in Ottawa . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Stanbury : 
my old friend Al Graham , who has done so much for Nova Scotia , for the Liberal Party and democracy at home and abroad , and also , in its broadest sense , for the people of Canada , will continue to lead the government forces in the Senate with charm , wit and intellect . 
esteemed colleagues , these 30 years have been challenging , interesting , often satisfying and occasionally frustrating , but always stimulating . 
i thank you . 
god bless . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
fisheries and Oceans 
misuse of Funds Earmarked for Assistance to Displaced West Coast Fishermen 
hon. Pat Carney : 
honourable senators , such an outstanding speech is a hard act to follow , but I know the senator will be pleased that , in returning to the business of the day , I will be speaking about West Coast issues . 
the West Coast media are reporting that British Columbia ' s salmon fishery may face a total shutdown this year and the fleet may never leave the docks . 
with the fishing season only weeks away , this is terrifying news for fishermen in communities along our coast , particularly those who bought into the government ' s Mifflin plan and are thus heavily in debt . 
the Community Fisheries Development Centre , based in Vancouver and with offices helping displaced fishermen throughout B.C. , has been advocating for months for a federal government $ 397 - million investment strategy for the West Coast , including community economic development assistance , new development for fisheries , and habitat and stock restoration and enhancement . 
the Auditor General , in his 1997 report , confirmed the importance of habitat restoration ; yet this winter the federal government cancelled a mapping and inventory program developed on the coast to standardize essential salmon habitat mapping and inventory services and put displaced fishermen back to work . 
the federal government ' s most recent response to the crisis on the West Coast came at the beginning of April with Minister David Anderson ' s claim that the federal government has spent $ 220 million to assist displaced fishermen in British Columbia . 
the fishermen ' s union in Vancouver , the United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union , says that this figure is 
Canadians and British Columbians are being misled into believing that there is real financial assistance for communities devastated by the policies of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans . 
for instance , DFO claims that $ 80 million has been used for a fishing vessel buy - back program in 1996 . 
the union says that $ 65 million was collected from the fishermen themselves over the last 26 years in the form of license fees , and was earmarked by DFO for the buy - back . 
that money actually went to displace fishermen and those who worked on the boats but did not own licences . 
DFO claims that $ 15 million has been earmarked for habitat restoration . 
the union says only half of that has been spent so far , and of that half , only $ 3.8 million was used to put fishermen back to work . 
the remainder was used to hire others to repair salmon streams . 
DFO claims that $ 7.7 million has been spent through an early retirement package . 
minister Streifel , B.C. ' s new Minister of Fisheries , has refused to endorse this package . 
DFO admits that $ 8 million to $ 10 million came from federal revenues and the rest came from Employment Insurance premiums , so that is not new money . 
DFO claims that $ 5.04 million is being added to a legacy fund providing loans to fishermen as start - up financing , working capital , or for business expansion for the development of local ocean - based ventures . 
furthermore , DFO , acting as a Communities Futures enforcement agent , can seize fishermen ' s licences upon failure to make a payment . 
i am hoping that the government will take the opportunity to clarify the amount of money that is actually spent on assisting the transition of the West Coast fisheries and table accurate figures in this matter and , further , will meet the requirement of the $ 397 million for the displaced workers . 
none of that will work until the Mifflin plan itself is changed . 
if you have borrowed and mortgaged your house to buy other licences under the Mifflin plan ' s Area Licence Stacking Program and are then told by the same government that your boat is to be tied up for the summer while you pay interest on that government - incurred debt , this program will not work . 
Israel 
fiftieth Anniversary of Establishment as State 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , the 20 th century is the century of the nation state , but will it be known as the killing century ? 
during the 20 th century , more people were killed by state - inspired science than in all previous centuries of this millennium . 
the 20 th century is also a paradox , for this century could also be known as the century of rebirth and miracles . 
so it is with the rebirth of Israel , whose fiftieth anniversary we celebrate today . 
miracles do not come easily . 
Israel occupies less than one - three hundred and fiftieth of 1 per cent of Arab lands in the Middle East . 
as a matter of fact , Israel could fit neatly into the island of Vancouver . 
is it any wonder that every inch of space is contested with so much blood and so much passion ? 
the United Nations recognizes this essence of space . 
despite its wars for survival , despite the fact that it remains in this century the only robust democracy in the Middle East , Israel still remains a question mark in the minds of its intimate neighbours and others . 
where should one start to recount the miracle of Israel ' s rebirth ? 
perhaps we could start with the odyssey of one man . 
how did it come about that this man , born before the turn of the century , the son of a poor Russian lumberman who earned a living rafting up and down the Dnieper in the heart of Russia , rose to become a leading chemical scientist in England and then on to the world stage as the first head of a state in the land known as Israel in 3,000 years ? 
as an impoverished youth in Czarist Russia , horrified by pogroms , eye witness to virulent and violent anti - Semitism , Chaim Weizmann became an ardent Zionist . 
he wrote : 
... from the beginning , I looked upon Zionism as a force for life in creativity residing in the Jewish masses ... 
it was not simply the blind need of an exiled people for a home . 
... if the Jewish people survived , it was not a biological accident but because they would not relinquish the creative capacities with which they had been entrusted . 
Weizmann went on to recount in detail the struggles from within and without the movement that plagued the path to statehood . 
sadly , these struggles continue . 
perhaps , honourable senators , struggles are inseparable from the human condition . 
from the start of the Zionist movement at the turn of the century , that youthful teenage student was delegated by his small Russian community to attend the second meeting of the Zionist Congress in Basel , Switzerland . 
there he began to preach , cajole , and argue for an organic Zionism , a return to Zion based on concrete ideas of freedom and creativity . 
how did he and his colleagues accomplish this feat ? 
what preoccupied their thoughts ? 
what practical steps did they take ? 
how did he and his colleagues , with no political leverage and minuscule financial support , accomplish this feat of statecraft ? 
what practical steps obsessed them ? 
from the very start , Chaim Weizmann emphasized the building - blocks of a civil society . 
first , funds were raised , collected in small blue coin boxes scattered across the Diaspora in the homes of the poor masses . 
then Weizmann led the fight to establish a university . 
the Hebrew University was started on Mount Scopus in Jerusalem in 1918 . 
he was then responsible for the opening of a school for the arts and crafts as well as a national library . 
education and re - education for adults and children alike was to be the lifeblood of his movement . 
children were taught to plant , to grow , to build and to share ideas of culture and recapture their history . 
a modern Hebrew language was created and brought to life after 2,000 years of misuse . 
they were given practical skills to make the land blossom . 
for 3,000 years , a diverse , ragged and harassed group called " Jews " were scattered across the globe and survived clinging only to one book and a calendar of weekly remembrances . 
it was these masses who began the trickle of resettlement into a destitute , malaria - infested , arid corner of the globe which , for centuries , had lain neglected as part of the old Ottoman Empire . 
slowly , these pioneers began to transform the land and the swamps inch by inch , foot by foot , acre by acre , field by field into a " land of milk and honey . " 
as Wiezmann wrote 50 years ago , it was by trial and error that Israel arose , and it is by trial and error that she will flourish . 
since Israel ' s rebirth , one Israeli citizen has been killed in hostile attacks for each day of the calendar since the formation of the State of Israel 50 years ago . 
not one family in Israel is untouched by personal tragedy . 
one observer recently noted that : 
in Israel , there is , on average , one memorial for every twenty - two dead soldiers ; in Europe the ratio is one memorial for every 10,000 dead . 
there is no week in the Israeli calendar in which there is not a memorial day of some sort for a traumatic event . 
one should not forget yet . 
memory cannot cripple the future . 
where does Israel go from here , this land of burgeoning farmers , scientists , labourers , engineers , artists , scholars and soldiers ? 
Israel continues to struggle within itself and with others for space and security , for peaceful space below its feet and in its hearts and minds to fulfil its ancient , still - to - be - defined mission " to be a light unto itself " and the biblical prophecy " to be a light unto the nations . " 
the name " Chaim , " Mr. Wiezmann ' s first name , means " life . " 
so I say " L ' Chaim - to life ! " 
as it is said ; so let it be written ; so let it be done . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I welcome the statement made by Senator Grafstein . 
for this side , I would add that Canadians join with men and women of goodwill from all around the world in extending to all the peoples of Israel every best wish for peace and prosperity on this fiftieth anniversary . 
the search for peace , together with the need for subduing desertification and increasing the water supply , have created a tangible and positive atmosphere for collaborative development . 
honourable senators , there is one fiftieth anniversary project known as the Jubilee Forest at Yatir in the Negev Desert . 
i am pleased that New Brunswickers from the province I represent are working on that project by planting a New Brunswick forest as an important part of the Jubilee Forest . 
the New Brunswick forest will consist of more than 20,000 trees at Yatir which is located at the northeastern gateway to the Negev Desert , 25 kilometres northeast of Be ' er Sheva and 22 kilometres west of Masada in the Dead Sea . 
under the leadership of our colleague from New Brunswick , Senator Erminie Cohen , our New Brunswick forest in the Negev is a concrete expression of people - to - people contact , in this instance between the people of New Brunswick , who have been blessed with a natural forest , and the peoples of the Negev Desert who are challenged to make the desert bloom . 
we are all pleased to lend our support to this fiftieth anniversary undertaking . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , today we are celebrating the fiftieth birthday of a state which is a creation of the United Nations . 
what does the word " creation " mean in this context ? 
it means that , on November 29 , 1947 , the UN decided that there would be two states on the land of Palestine , one for the Jews and the other for the Palestinians . 
this is exactly what Resolution 181 meant . 
it is surprising to learn , delving back into the history , that two Canadians played a particularly important role . 
the first was Supreme Court Justice Rand . 
he represented Canada on a committee and presented a report which gave birth to United Nations Resolution 181 . 
this was facilitated by another Canadian , a great ambassador , Lester B . Pearson , who represented Canada in these discussions . 
so we must forget history . 
with all the friendship we may have for each other , one state for another , it must be said and repeated that , unfortunately , there will never be peace in that region of the world until the state of Palestine is created . 
i always have a card with me to remind me of my responsibilities , not as a Quebecer or a French Canadian but as a Canadian . 
when one looks at the UN vote , out of the 56 voters , 33 were in favour , almost half of which were representatives of Christian countries throughout the Americas , from Canada to South America . 
this represents 45 per cent of the votes in favour . 
i have no hesitation in taking as much time as the two speakers who preceded me . 
there are people who are celebrating today , so I do not want to be seen as a spoilsport . 
but these celebrations to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the creation of the State of Israel should not make us forget our responsibility to finally achieve peace . 
the current Palestinian problem cannot help but rub off on neighbouring countries and that is why a solution must be found . 
when the State of Palestine is created , I will be the first to rise and affirm that the two states are equally untouchable and protected . 
everyone has been asked , including me , to participate . 
your Honour is doing an extraordinary job as an ambassador for all of us . 
all chairmen and members of parliamentary associations have been asked exert the maximum possible influence with their friends around the world to vote for Canada . 
that means that some people doubt that we may win the vote . 
if we ask for people ' s vote , we must deserve it . 
i applaud but let us continue our work towards the ultimate goal that will mean ultimate security for Israel . 
visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I would draw the attention of honourable senators to the presence in our gallery of a distinguished visitor from the People ' s Republic of China , His Excellency Xu Kuangdi , the Governor of Shanghai . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
on behalf of all senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
tobacco Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the fifth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology which deals with Bill S - 8 , to amend the Tobacco Act ( content regulation ) . 
i ask that the report be printed as an appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day . 
( for text of document see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Murray , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
privacy Commissioner 
reappointment of Present Incumbent 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) , I move : 
that , in accordance with subsection 53 ( 3 ) of the Act to extend the present laws of Canada that protect the privacy of individuals and that provide individuals with a right of access to personal information about themselves , Chapter P - 21 , of the Revised Statutes of Canada 1985 , the Senate approve the reappointment of Bruce Phillips as Privacy Commissioner for a term of two years . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , if this is the one and only opportunity that we will have to debate this matter , let me express my personal satisfaction as one who has known Mr. Phillips for many years and respected his career as a journalist and as a diplomat for a time at our embassy in Washington . 
i have been proud of his excellent work as Privacy Commissioner these past number of years . 
you will understand , honourable senators , if I also take some considerable satisfaction in his reappointment because of the somewhat turbulent debate that accompanied his appointment in the first place , but that is all water under the bridge and I assure the Senate of our wholehearted support for this motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave from the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until next Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 , at two o ' clock in the afternoon . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
social Housing Programs 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , I give notice : 
that on Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 , I will move that the Senate Standing Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report on the damaging consequences of the recent decision of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation , CMHC , to terminate all of its social housing programs excepting the Rural Residential Rehabilitation Assistance Program , commonly known as RRRAP ; 
that the committee take into particular consideration the impact of this decision on the housing needs of all aboriginal peoples , including the M é tis , who now face the prospect of losing any government assistance as the federal government seeks to negotiate new arrangements with the governments of the provinces and territories ; and 
that the committee make its final report no later on November 18 , 1998 . 
aboriginal Volunteer Organizations 
notice of Motion to Urge Government to Reinstate Funding 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday May 5 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Senate urge the government to reconsider its recent decision to terminate funding to Frontiers Foundation Inc. , Operation Beaver , a 30 - year - old aboriginal volunteer organization which has successfully provided new housing and rehabilitated existing housing as well as constructed training centres , schools and other community buildings for aboriginal communities throughout Canada . 
west Coast Fisheries 
effect of Federal Policies on Coastal Communities - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , for Senator Carney , I give notice that , on Wednesday next , May 6 , 1998 , she will call the attention of the Senate to the effect of federal policies relating to West Coast fisheries on coastal communities and on fishermen themselves . 
question PERIOD 
north American Free Trade Agreement 
softwood Lumber Agreement - United States Trade Action on Pre - Drilled Studs - Government Position 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , most of you know we are facing some fairly tough times in the lumber industry in British Columbia . 
many sawmills have been closed or had their working hours cut back temporarily . 
as many as 10,000 workers , more than 10 per cent of B.C. ' s forest industry employees , have been laid off for varying periods of time in recent months . 
recent U.S. trade action on pre - drilled studs will only exacerbate the situation . 
pre - drilled studs are a form of lumber that is treated as joinery and carpentry wood and , therefore , outside the exportable limits of wood imposed by the Canada - U.S. Softwood Lumber Agreement . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the concern of the Honourable Senator St. Germain in this regard . 
i want to make it clear that the U.S. customs decision is not final . 
the government is assessing , with industry and the provinces , whether the basis for the U.S. reclassification of what is described as drilled studs is consistent with their trade obligations . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I apologize to the Leader of the Government in the Senate for not having given him advance warning of this detailed question . 
i have , on occasion , defended the position of the United States on various issues . 
however , I should like to know whether there are any moves afoot to reconsider the entire quota system . 
to be fair , I believe that it was pressure from the provinces that forced the federal government into this situation . 
they did not go into it willingly , and I think fairness must prevail in this issue . 
however , I hope that the government is reconsidering this position and possibly looking at ways of mitigating the losses that are occurring , and the possibility of opting out of this unsatisfactory agreement . 
will the Leader of the Government please comment on that ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I believe it was in late 1997 that the government provided what would generally be referred to as comments to the United States on its review , providing a Revenue Canada opinion supporting classification outside the agreement . 
i know that the entire issue of the quota system is being monitored on an ongoing basis , but I would need to determine from my colleagues whether it will be reviewed at this time . 
Canadian companies have 30 days , I believe , to make comments on this revised ruling . 
in addition , individual firms have the right and the ability to appeal such a ruling through the United States court system . 
Canadian Heritage 
suitability of New Commissioners Appointed to Canadian Radio - Television and Telecommunications Commission - Government Position 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
honourable senators , my question for the Leader of the Government concerns recent appointments to the Canadian Radio - television and Telecommunications Commission . 
there is a common belief among Canadian consumers that the CRTC has grown too close to the industry which it is supposed to regulate . 
with recent increases in the cost of telephone and cable services , Canadians rely on the CRTC for consumer advocacy , but there have been abundant complaints of late that too many of the commission ' s members are former executives from the telecommunications industry . 
these protests have grown stronger , and with the recent appointment of several new commissioners with strong ties to the telecommunications industry , one must ask whether the Minister of Canadian Heritage regards the CRTC as a regulating body to represent the public interest . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would question whether the recent appointments are too close to the industry . 
senator Johnson : 
honourable senators , I beg to differ with the Leader of the Government . 
the CRTC ' s independence is a matter of some debate as we speak , even among the minister ' s own caucus . 
today , the minister met with a broad group of Liberal members of Parliament who are asking that the CRTC be restructured so that a majority of commissioners are independent of the telecommunications industry . 
given that the CRTC contains so few independent commissioners , could the Leader of the Government in the Senate ask the Minister of Canadian Heritage what measures she will undertake to ensure that the CRTC fairly represents Canadian consumers in the future ? 
it is very alarming that the minister seems to have a fragile handle on the major policy issue in her department , and the CRTC fiasco is but another example of a department in crisis . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I believe that Senator Johnson has a legitimate personal concern in this respect , and I would be very happy to bring her concerns to the attention of the minister . 
national Defence 
acquisition of New Equipment for Armed Forces - Government Police 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have a broad question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
as we all know , the Auditor General ' s report has raised eyebrows with respect to the importance of equipping and modernizing the Canadian forces , particularly from the aspect of an adequate funding plan . 
it took about four years for the present administration to bring capital spending by the Department of National Defence down to the level of the 1970 s . 
i quote : 
although the National Defence budget is expected to increase to compensate partially for inflation , within the next 15 years - if current trends continue - spending on capital could approximate 1970 s levels . 
the Auditor General found that " capital expenditures could drop as low as 9 to 12 per cent of the Defence budget by the year 2012 - 13 . " 
can the minister give some indication of what the midterm and long - term planning is with respect to the acquisition of new and modern equipment for the forces ? 
we are now blessed with the new coastal defence vessels . 
we have at least the hope in the near future of getting new search and rescue EH - 101 s . 
we are looking forward to receiving the Upholder class submarines . 
however , there is so much more that must be done . 
this is just the tip of the iceberg . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate shed some light on the policy penchant of the government ? 
perhaps he might indicate whether or not we should be thinking about separating the capital and operational maintenance budgets within the Armed Forces so that military planners can look not just to tomorrow but to the short - and midterm , if not the long term , with respect to contingent defence planning for Canada . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , dealing with the last part of Senator Forrestall ' s suggestion first , the undertaking for acquiring the submarines was made within the budget of the Department of National Defence . 
i think he makes a useful suggestion with respect to the possibility of separating capital from operational maintenance budgets . 
it is worthy of note that the Auditor General said that the task of re - equipping the Canadian forces is indeed a big challenge , particularly in light of the defence budget reductions as well as the budget reductions that have been made in other departments . 
these reductions have taken place over the last five years in order to bring reality to our fiscal responsibilities . 
nevertheless , the government remains committed to providing military personnel with the equipment they need to do the job . 
as Senator Forrestall knows , six capital equipment projects are meeting their cost - performance objectives . 
as I said yesterday , the Auditor General made several useful suggestions that will be incorporated in the way in which the defence department carries out its business . 
possibility of Establishing Standing Committee on Defence - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
given the fact that we are bound to have a number of items of a related nature that would be worthy of review by a specially convened committee of this chamber , what is the government ' s position in that regard ? 
this question may be a bit premature ; however , if the honourable senator wishes to share his views , I would appreciate it . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i do not think this kind of suggestion is premature at all . 
as a matter of fact , it has been the source of ongoing discussions between the leadership on both sides of the house . 
indeed , the establishment of a special defence committee is a subject of consideration by the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders at the present time . 
it is my understanding that the matter is currently under active consideration . 
national Finance 
access of Parliament to Evaluations of Policies and Programs of Department of Finance - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , the Auditor General writes in his recent report that there are several gaps in the way the Department of Finance reports to Parliament on the effectiveness of its policies and programs . 
he said : 
parliament has been asking for more transparency from Finance and is still not getting it . 
he further said : 
it is crucial that it set the example and better inform Parliament about the effectiveness of its policies and programs . 
yet , the department says it is doing enough by putting out press releases consultation papers and budget background information . 
the Department of Finance does not wish to give Parliament the formal kind of elevations recommended by the Auditor General because , it was stated : 
does the Leader of the Government believe that it is appropriate for one of the most important departments , a department that spans 43 per cent of the government ' s budget , to continue to deny Parliament regular and timely access to information on the results that policies and programs have achieved ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators the Department of Finance already makes great efforts to achieve the objective alluded to by Senator Stratton . 
the department undertakes regular reviews , analyses and monitorings which are regularly published in a variety of forms . 
the honourable senator mentioned the budgets , consultation papers and press releases . 
there are frequent discussions on budgets and regular reports . 
of course we can do more . 
there are resource constraints and there may be diminishing returns in that respect . 
there are those who would say that doing more would risk not getting value for money by diverting resources from their best use . 
the Honourable Senator Stratton has made some suggestions , and I will convey his suggestions as well as his opinions to the Minister of Finance . 
senator Stratton : 
i appreciate that consideration . 
what the Auditor General is looking for is a measurement of the effectiveness of the policies and programs , not just a financial reporting . 
i would quote from an editorial in today ' s edition of The Financial Post which ties in with the question I asked yesterday . 
this is uncalled for . 
he reports directly to Parliament , not the government . 
the department ' s accounting approach undermines the credibility of government reporting and should be reassessed . 
i read that paragraph to expand on the question I asked yesterday . 
it is disturbing when one reads about this subject in editorials . 
it is insulting to publicly rebuke our Auditor General for having the temerity to report this kind of information which is precisely the function of the Auditor General ' s office . 
does the Leader of the Government have any comment to offer in this regard ? 
senator Graham : 
the assertion of the Auditor General is that it is inconceivable that Parliament or Canadians do not know about the role of the Department of Finance in the CPP . 
the department ' s role in the CPP has been made abundantly clear . 
there have been references to the CPP in every budget . 
there has been a joint federal - provincial consultation paper . 
there has been public consultation across the country . 
based on those consultations , a report was published . 
the Department of Finance created a special website . 
the Department of Finance prepared draft bills on the CPP , they issued numerous press releases and the Minister of Finance informed Parliament . 
when the federal and provincial governments reached their agreements , the minister appeared before the committee of the House of Commons and before the Committee of the Whole in the Senate . 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permits for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa - Government Position 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , a regrettable thing is happening right now in Ottawa . 
in yesterday ' s and today ' s editions , The Ottawa Citizen reports that , unfortunately , some councillor or committee at Ottawa ' s City Hall has refused to deliver the permits required for the construction of Saudi Arabia ' s embassy . 
i am not a lobbyist and I do not work for anybody , but I do work for Canada . 
in 1979 I had to deal with another issue in which Saudi Arabia was also involved . 
it was so serious that Prime Minister Trudeau did not hesitate to call an election . 
i still claim we called the election because we were in a deadlock . 
even though it is not the business of the Department of Foreign Affairs , I was very surprised to read that an official of the Department of Foreign Affairs has said the department recognizes the desirability of having an embassy , but that any building or construction can only proceed with the required permits in place . 
Mr. Minister , this has been going on for over 10 years . 
yes , it is a beautiful piece of land , but they bought it . 
the National Capital Commission , at my request , was involved . 
the Prime Minister ' s Office , prior to this one , was aware of what was going on . 
however , no moves have been made . 
the Saudis wonder what is the true motivation for the refusal . 
if you go to Boteler Street , as I did today , you will notice that there are no houses there , only big buildings . 
it is the residents of these buildings that " seem " to be opposed . 
could some more affirmative action not be taken by the government and the minister to remind the people at City Hall that Ottawa is not any little city in Canada ? 
Ottawa is the capital of Canada . 
it has responsibilities . 
you cannot have all the goodies of being the capital and not also realize that you cannot turn down these requests . 
i see now that you are in consultation . 
i would hope that between now and next Tuesday people work on this because I think , if we are proactive , we may achieve some positive results . 
at the moment , the government is asking all parliamentarians , as I said earlier , to consult with friends around the world in order to win a seat at the United Nations Security Council , as we have always wanted . 
i am not blind and nor are others . 
everyone is nervous . 
everyone is campaigning . 
colleagues on your side wave to me and say , " Yes I was asked by some ambassador from some strange country we never pay attention to . " 
now everybody is interested because it is in Canada ' s interest . 
surely someone somewhere should say more than , " Even though it is not our responsibility , we think it would be nice if they had the necessary permit . " 
it will be a magnificent embassy . 
it will not visually offend those who may not like to see the flag of Saudi Arabia flying . 
it is their land . 
everyone agrees it will be a magnificent building . 
when it becomes known , within a few days , I do not think Canadians will be very proud of what will be uncovered . 
there is still time to save the day . 
would the minister communicate my remarks to the Minister of Foreign Affairs ? 
i do not write letters to people who do not read them . 
i prefer make my views known here , in the open , to ensure the message will be delivered . 
it is a serious matter , much more serious than people think . 
the ambassador ' s arrival here has been delayed again and again . 
there is no ambassador from Saudi Arabia in Canada . 
people should ask why . 
he is supposed to arrive within a month , so he should be here for July 1 . 
i ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate to convey , to whoever will listen , this very strong representation . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as usual , the Honourable Senator Prud ' homme speaks very eloquently and passionately on this subject . 
this , as he would know , is a zoning problem within the City of Ottawa , but it also has international implications . 
i would be very pleased to take his representations directly to the Minister of Foreign Affairs . 
national Defence 
request for Answers to Order Paper Questions 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , some months ago , I placed a series of questions on the Order Paper and was told that the Privy Council would not answer them . 
on October 21 , 1997 , I asked a question about the Canadian Army and particular units that I believed were somewhat under strength . 
on November 5 , 1997 , I asked about problems with reserve pay . 
i received written answers to both of these questions stating that there were no problems . 
on November 26 , 1997 , I rose and informed the Leader of the Government that the day before , before a committee in the other place , General Kinsman , the ADM of personnel , testified that there were constant problems with respect to reserve pay . 
we all know that . 
competent military observers have informed me , for example , that 3 RCR was drawing on troops from across the country and had artillery acting as infantry . 
the army did have under - strength units and probably still does . 
honourable senators , I received a story from fantasy land in the hopes that my staff and I are so incompetent that it would go over our heads . 
on February 10 , 1998 , I placed a question on the Order Paper with regard to the investigation of alleged incidents involving members of CANBAT II at Bakovici . 
to date , I have not received an answer from the government . 
this morning ' s news tells me and Canadians that 54 of the 60 soldiers involved in Bakovici had been cleared . 
i get my answers from CTV news . 
i ask serious questions in this chamber about the defence of Canada , and what do I get from the government most of the time ? 
sincerity from the government leader , no question about that , but I do not get answers . 
i get stories . 
now the government has chosen to respond to questions through CTV news . 
i am shocked and appalled that the government would treat parliamentarians in this manner . 
it is clear that the government has learned nothing from Somalia . 
where is the accountability and transparency ? 
when I ask questions , as I am somewhat obliged to do from time to time , not because I want to but because I care about this country , I expect the courtesy of an answer and , if a answer is not available , I expect to be sent a note to that effect with an explanation of why an answer is not available . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I understand Senator Forrestall ' s frustration . 
he brings to the government some legitimate concerns . 
i give him my undertaking that we will review the answers that have been given in this particular case and determine whether or not we can provide more complete and adequate responses to his very legitimate questions . 
orders OF THE DAY 
royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
honourable senators , it is with pride and conviction that I address you today to sponsor Bill C - 12 . 
many RCMP members continuously put their lives in danger for humanity ' s sake , for our safety . 
this legislation will amend the RCMP Superannuation Act to ensure that the RCMP members serving in special duty areas are automatically considered to be on duty 24 hours a day , and therefore have complete coverage . 
at present , the act provides for coverage only during periods of scheduled shifts . 
minister Andy Scott says : 
this legislation will make RCMP members who serve as peace - keepers eligible for the same health benefits accorded military personnel . 
it is only fair that RCMP serving in the same areas as Armed Forces personnel be eligible for the same benefit coverage . 
RCMP members are currently ineligible , by definition , for benefits via the Special Duty Area Pension Order . 
however , RCMP members cannot access benefits that are available to the Canadian Armed Forces members beside whom they serve , despite exposure to hazards that resulted in the special duty area designation . 
bill C - 12 is intended to address this unconventional situation , not only for RCMP members now in Haiti but also to provide for the probable future employment of RCMP members in similar operations in light of the federal government ' s ongoing commitment to Canada ' s peace - keeping role . 
the following is a history of RCMP as peace - keepers : 
as early as 1873 , the Northwest Mounted Police served as peace - keepers , supervising the treaties between the Indian tribes and the federal government . 
in the war in South Africa , known as the Boer War , from 1899 to 1902 , more that 200 members served in two mounted rifle units , the Second Canadian Mounted Rifles and the Lord Strathcona ' s Horse , whose unit performed outstanding service . 
during the First World War , the Northwest Mounted Police acted as border patrol , performing surveillance of enemy aliens and enforcing national security regulations . 
in the First World War , 1914 to 1918 , RCMP formed one squadron in Europe and one in Siberia . 
in the Second World War , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police protected national security . 
during the Second World War , from 1939 to 1945 , 125 RCMP members performed duties overseas in the No. 1 Provost Company . 
from 1946 to 1984 , the RCMP provided screening assistance for prospective immigrants to the Immigration Branch overseas . 
this service was called the silent force because during these 38 years , and even today , there is very little mention of this service provided by more than 200 regular members . 
environmental Policing Service is a federal enforcement function in which the RCMP has acted , protecting coastal fisheries and monitoring hazardous waste disposal and the dumping of pollutants . 
the RCMP have served in a wide variety of roles , such as counter - intelligence and security officers , United Nations peace - keepers , bodyguards , Customs officers , and border guards . 
in 1989 , the RCMP began their first United Nations mission . 
they were required to provide 100 members to act as police monitors . 
the mandate of the United Nations Transition Group was to oversee the free elections in Namibia . 
in April , 1992 , the RCMP took part in a United Nations peace - keeping mission in the former Yugoslavia under the auspices of the United Nations Protection Force , and served there until 1995 . 
the RCMP members involved in UN peace - keeping are required to be in top psychological and physical condition , and they need to be prepared for the inevitable difficulties they will encounter . 
these members know that anything can happen at any time . 
they know that their lives may be in danger . 
members who do peace - keeping duty in other countries are special people . 
the RCMP have maintained units in the United Nations missions in Haiti since 1993 . Presently , the RCMP have members posted in the following countries . 
their mandate is to cooperate and assist in the strengthening of the institutions working for the protection of human rights in Guatemala , and to verify the implementation of the agreement on human rights signed between the government of Guatemala and the URNG in Mexico in March , 1994 . 
these members are serving also as police peace - keepers under the UN umbrella . 
they are basically responsible for on - the - job training for 5,000 - plus members of the Haitian national police force . 
RCMP officers remain part of the effort to bring stability to Haiti . 
there is one police officer for this mission , and his mandate is to provide assistance and expertise in the protection of human rights , particularly among minorities , monitor and advise on the implementation of legislation , and monitor the functioning and development of democratic institutions , processes and mechanisms . 
there is a total of five police officers in this mission , and their mandate is to provide analysis of information of a criminal context to investigation teams concerning persons or events relating to the former Yugoslavia ; collect , collate and integrate material and information relating to persons and events under legislation ; maintain strict confidentiality and security of information , and perform other tasks as required by the team leader . 
the " Mission Statement " of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is as follows : 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is Canada ' s national police service . 
proud of our traditions and confident in meeting future challenges , we commit to preserve the peace , uphold the law , and provide quality service in partnership with our communities . 
RCMP members continue to serve in times of need through UN peace - keeping efforts , lending their expertise and assistance to people around the world . 
the following is a quotation from Robert Service : 
half around the world , if need there be . 
this is how we described the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
here are some comments of RCMP members who served in Haiti : 
relations between the RCMP involved in training the new Haiti national police force and Haitian officials appear deeply troubled . 
the Mounties are not happy . 
in 1998 , we celebrate the 125 - year history of the RCMP with a theme - " A Proud History ... 
a Challenging Future . " 
honourable senators , I seek your unanimous support in my sponsorship of Bill C - 12 . 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I rise today to speak on Bill C - 12 , to amend the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Superannuation Act . 
i should like to compliment Senator Chalifoux on her excellent chronology and description of the great work that the members of this force have done . 
honourable senators , I am a little concerned . 
i am looking at a commentary from the Library of Parliament which states that owing to its largely uncontroversial subject - matter , Bill C - 12 is not expected to prompt public comment to any significant degree . 
i wonder why they said this because I am sure I will turn it into a controversy . 
i am very proud to speak on Bill C - 12 , which would provide peace - keepers who are members of the RCMP with the same pension entitlements in the event of illness , injury or death as peace - keepers from the Canadian Armed Forces . 
in my view , this bill will address a long - standing inequity which exists for members of the RCMP serving abroad as peace - keepers in special duty areas . 
thus , I support this legislation , as does the full Progressive Conservative caucus - as I am sure do all senators in this place - because finally the members of the RCMP who serve in peace - keeping roles will be treated the same as their counterparts in the Canadian Armed Forces . 
Canadians are justifiably proud of our country ' s tradition as peace - keepers in the world . 
over the past 30 years , thousands of Canadians have risked their lives to enforce United Nations resolutions around the world . 
since then , the members of the RCMP have participated in United Nations missions to the former Yugoslavia , Haiti and Rwanda , as has been so well catalogued by Senator Chalifoux . 
due to the bravery of these men and women , much - needed peace and security were provided to these developing nations in times of crisis . 
it is tragic that not of all of these countries where Canada has served still enjoy the peace and security which they so desperately need . 
however , we accomplished something by giving these countries the tools to develop a democratic system of government and an effective security force which will help ensure respect for human rights and dignity . 
it is now up to these countries to decide if they have the courage to put these tools to work for their citizens . 
for close to a decade now , members of the RCMP have put themselves in the line of fire without the same protection given their colleagues in the Canadian Armed Forces . 
many members of the RCMP serving in peace - keeping roles have already experienced violent confrontation . 
it is time that the government extends to these great men and women the benefits which they deserve . 
it is the very least we can do to show our appreciation for their courage on behalf of all of us . 
however , honourable senators , while I applaud the federal government for its action in regard to this inequity , there is a greater inequity that exists which the government has not yet addressed , and that is the compensation , living standards and benefits for the members of the Canadian Armed Forces . 
from information I have received , morale in the Canadian Armed Forces is now at an all - time low . 
many of our military families are struggling to get by and are being forced to rely , in certain instances , I am told , on food banks and other forms of social assistance . 
the reality is that the government - and when I speak of government , I am not only speaking of the government today , but the former administration , too , which I think could have done more to assist these people - has taken advantage of the integrity of the men and women who serve in the Canadian Armed Forces . 
the government is using them for cheap labour and getting away with it because they know that , traditionally , members of the Canadian Armed Forces will not complain openly in public . 
i was appalled to read recently about the living conditions at military bases across this country . 
i was equally appalled at the recent statistics about the level of compensation and benefits that members of our military are receiving . 
something must be done , and , fellow senators , something must be done soon . 
when I joined the Canadian Armed Forces , I did not do so to become rich . 
i do not think anyone who joins the military expects to make huge salaries , but I do think they expect to be able to provide adequately for their families . 
the truth today is that many of our military families are living in conditions of poverty , in drastically substandard housing . 
in fact , it would not be unfair to say that the military bases across Canada are in some ways becoming ghettos , and this opinion is based on concrete information . 
the military life is said to be a life like no other . 
military families can be separated for up to six or nine months at a time , and sometimes on just a moment ' s notice . 
they are shipped off to a foreign country to either separate warring factions or to engage an enemy in a battlefield . 
honourable senators , the last thing they should have to worry about is whether their children back home are warm and have enough to eat . 
where would we have been during the last year here in Canada without the assistance of our Canadian military ? 
with two of our country ' s most damaging natural disasters of the century , those being the Manitoba floods and the central Canada ice storm , it was the men and women of the Canadian military who were called upon to assist . 
not only did their assistance ease the pain , I am convinced that their intervention saved many lives . 
however , honourable senators , how frustrating and degrading it must have been for the members of our military working alongside Ontario Hydro workers who were making up to $ 80 an hour . 
it must be equally frustrating for the members of the Canadian Armed Forces who served along with the members of the RCMP in peace - keeping roles , knowing that their counterparts in the RCMP are being compensated at a fair - and I say " fair " - but much higher level . 
i understand that a parliamentary committee is currently travelling the country to examine the situation , and I compliment the government on that . 
i encourage members of this committee to make strong recommendations to the Minister of Defence so that he can take them back to cabinet so that the government can address this inequity , which will help to restore the pride , and thus the morale , of our Canadian forces . 
honourable senators , I , along with Senator Chalifoux , ask that Bill C - 12 pass unanimously and give full consideration to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for their committed service and dedication to our country . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I am pleased to ask for the support of this place for Bill C - 28 . 
the second section deals with a large array of technical amendments first released in draft form in April 1995 . 
these amendments found themselves in Bill C - 69 which was tabled in the other place in November 1996 but died on the Order Paper . 
in fact , all measures in this bill have been in the public domain for quite some time . 
it is truly legislation covering a wide spectrum of issues and people . 
it contains various technical tax measures which are the day - to - day work of a responsible government . 
while some of these measures may be arcane to average Canadians , other measures will touch millions of our citizens . 
in fact , by its very nature , this legislation reflects the approach this government has taken to governance and their commitment to building a strong economy within a strong society . 
as the Minister of Finance said in his first budget : 
we are pursuing a balanced approach to fundamental reform - to create jobs , to continue to care for those in need , and to get the deficit down . 
the government recognized then that the key to a prosperous future for Canadians was getting Canada ' s books in order today . 
its prudent and balanced deficit control plan met its targets and exceeded them . 
as the Minister of Finance said in his February 1998 budget , the deficit is under control for the years 1997 - 98 , 1998 - 99 and 1999 - 2000 . 
it is Canada ' s first balanced budget in 30 years . 
in fact , Canada is the only G - 7 member to have a balanced budget . 
and that is not all . 
for the first time in close to 50 years , a Canadian government will table three consecutive balanced budgets . 
moreover , by the turn of the century , Canada ' s debt - to - GDP ratio should drop to a little over 60 per cent - a drop of about 10 percentage points since 1994 and the biggest reduction among G - 7 members . 
for our government , a balanced budget is not enough by itself . 
we have also pursued budgets of balance , budgets that recognize the need to continue to make key economic and social investments , even within the demands of fiscal constraint . 
that is the context in which I want to situate Bill C - 28 . 
canada ' s healthier finances have brought important rewards for Canadians - lower interest rates , strong growth , more jobs - but these healthier finances also mean that the government can now afford to make key social investments , investments that meet the needs and priorities of Canadians , investments such as those contained in Bill C - 28 . 
honourable senators , health and education issues affect all Canadians in all regions . 
our priorities and our actions reflect who we are and what we value as a nation . 
that is why , as our books improved , the government ' s priority was to invest in these key areas . 
this is the type of investment all Canadians can appreciate . 
it is the type of support for federal - provincial partnership and investment in society that all Canadians should endorse . 
the most significant part of the legislation before us today , both in terms of dollars and in terms of the number of Canadians who will benefit , is the measure to increase the cash floor of funding to provinces under the Canada Health and Social Transfer . 
bill C - 28 increases this guaranteed amount of federal cash funding for health care , post - secondary education , social assistance and services , from $ 11 billion to $ 12.5 billion per year through the year 2002 - 2003 . 
this cash floor , $ 12.5 billion , is the precise amount recommended by the National Forum on Health . 
the legislation before us starts applying this cash floor one year earlier than originally slated . 
this means the provinces will receive an extra $ 7 billion over six years . 
that is by far the largest new spending commitment this government has made since coming to office . 
the CHST measure represents by far the most financially substantive measure in this legislation . 
for that reason , and because of the attention it received during debate in the other place and in committee , I want to examine it in greater detail after I have highlighted the other important parts of this wide - ranging legislation . 
as you know , a key theme of both the 1997 and 1998 budgets was the vital importance to individual Canadians and to the future of our nation of enhancing knowledge and skills . 
bill C - 28 represents an important step in preparing for the knowledge economy and the new millennium . 
it follows through on our 1997 budget commitments to help Canadians save for their children ' s future education . 
the legislation before us today will double the amount that Canadians can contribute per child to a registered education savings plan each year . 
as well , Bill C - 28 will provide two options for Canadians who have contributed to an RESP but who then see the intended student not go on to post - secondary education . 
a second option will allow individuals without available RRSP room or who do not wish to make RRSP contributions to receive the investment income directly . 
this income will be subject to a 20 - per - cent tax penalty in addition to the regular income tax to prevent RESPs being used as tax deferral mechanisms unrelated to saving for education . 
honourable senators , as important as it is to build for tomorrow , a government must also help those who are in need today . 
a critical partner in helping to meet these needs is Canada ' s charitable sector . 
that is why , in each of the last three budgets , the government has made it easier for Canadians to contribute to charities , for example , by making a higher level of tax credit available for lower levels of giving . 
the 1997 budget proposed , and the present legislation will enact , further measures to help all charities attract more donations . 
bill C - 28 increases the amount of donations for which the charitable credit can generally be claimed from 50 per cent to 75 per cent of the donor ' s net income . 
this 75 - per - cent limit will apply equally to all charities , eliminating the previous advantage enjoyed by donations to the Crown and Crown foundations . 
this was an area where the existing tax law in Canada was much less generous than in the United States . 
now with Bill C - 28 , the tax rules affecting Canadian charities with respect to donations of securities will be on a comparable basis to charities south of the border . 
in short , Bill C - 28 will guarantee that the future growth of the tax points component of the Canada Health and Social Transfer is accompanied by a cash floor that will never go below $ 12.5 billion in the next five years . 
this $ 12.5 billion in federal funding will be there year after year . 
under the proposed legislation , more money will be allocated for the national health care program . 
there is another meaningful dimension to Bill C - 28 . 
one of the functions of a well - functioning economy is an effective , fair and transparent tax system , a system that allows companies and individuals to focus on the work of building and expanding their companies or personal endeavours through real value added , not through a manipulation of tax rules . 
other tax measures in Bill C - 28 include a new refundable film or video production services tax credit . 
the credit will be equal to 11 per cent of the cost of certified labour expenditures incurred by production services corporations for services rendered in Canada . 
this will stimulate job growth by encouraging Canadians as well as foreign - based film producers to employ the services of Canadians . 
in other words , companies will not be able to avoid or manipulate taxes by setting a transfer price that is artificial or arbitrary . 
the bill includes amendments designed to clarify international shipping rules introduced in 1991 to encourage foreign shippers to move their business activities to Canada . 
it contains action that stops bankrupt individuals from claiming a double deduction of personal tax credits , like the GST credit , in the year of bankruptcy . 
it also includes a measure that ensures that there will be no tax penalty for Canadians receiving disability benefits should the insurance company paying the benefits becomes insolvent and an employer takes on the responsibilities for those benefits . 
honourable senators , as I noted earlier , the technical tax provisions in Bill C - 28 were made public long ago through draft legislation and ways and means motions . 
as a result , they have been closely scrutinized by private - sector experts . 
the legislation before us fully reflects the revisions and improvements brought to us by such consultation and expert commentary and deserves the support of this place . 
as I indicated earlier , the increase in the cash floor of the Canada Health and Social Transfer is undoubtedly the part of this legislation that touches most broadly on the public interest . 
that is why I now want to return to it and address some of the commentary this change has attracted . 
some have charged that Canada ' s provinces have contributed an unfair share to the reduction of the federal deficit , and they dismiss the increase in the CHST cash floor which Bill C - 28 provides as merely restoring some of the funds we took away in the first place . 
there is no question that reductions were made in transfers to provinces under the CHST when it took effect in 1996 - 1997 . 
in fact , when the government launched its deficit - reduction strategy , virtually all areas of federal spending were affected . 
in order to attain this vital national goal , a national effort was needed . 
if the government had not acted as it did , we would not now be entering the post - deficit era . 
this bill would likely be asking you today to approve yet more spending cuts , yet more belt tightening . 
it is because the government did what was needed when it was needed that I am speaking to you today about providing renewed funding for key social programs . 
the truth is that provincial transfers represent approximately 20 per cent of all federal program expenditures , or one dollar in five . 
without reducing transfers , it would never have been possible to meet our commitment to fight the deficit . 
the question is to determine whether the government acted fairly . 
the answer is yes . 
in addition , the government notified the provinces a full year in advance so that they could adapt their programs and priorities accordingly . 
moreover , honourable senators , the CHST itself demonstrates the federal government ' s commitment to fairness and to positive partnership with the provinces . 
provinces have long expressed concern that the rigid conditions associated with the previous transfer system did not allow them to meet specific regional needs and opportunities , so the government restructured the 
previous patchwork system , with its separate targeted components , into a single transfer . 
the government instituted the CHST to deliver greater flexibility , while still firmly upholding the principles of the Canada Health Act . 
it is nevertheless true that , with a $ 42 - billion deficit to tackle , the government had to make meaningful cuts , but here again it strove to be fair . 
the government cut its own spending more than it cut anyone else ' s . 
the figures tell the story . 
some provinces , and some in this place , may try to cite different numbers , numbers that do not recognize that federal tax points are an important component of the total provincial entitlement . 
however , these tax points that have been provided to the provinces over the years mean real money in the hands of the provinces and a real loss of money in the hands of the federal government . 
in fact , this year alone , the value of the tax points the government has ceded to the provinces is over $ 13 billion . 
this is why the government can say that the total support to provinces under the CHST today exceeds $ 26 billion , and the value of these tax points grows as the economy strengthens . 
that is why the total value of the CHST to provinces is slated to increase 2.5 per cent annually , on average . 
this means that the CHST is projected to reach more than $ 28 billion by the year 2002 - 2003 . 
i have told you that the increase in the CHST cash floor will benefit provincial governments and individual Canadians . 
i now want to show you how that has already happened . 
some of you may remember that in last fall ' s economic update the Minister of Finance said that the increase in the cash floor would mean an extra $ 6 billion for the provinces . 
however , as I mentioned earlier , it is now known that this cumulative gain will be about $ 7 billion . 
where did the extra $ 1 billion come from ? 
this highlights the benefits of the tax - point component of the CHST . 
because economic growth has been stronger than originally projected , the tax - point portion of the CHST is worth more . 
in the absence of the cash floor increase contained in Bill C - 28 , this would actually have triggered a reduction in the cash portion of federal funding that provinces would receive . 
in dollars - and - cents terms , this year and next , the tax - point share of the CHST is forecast to be worth about $ 200 million more than previously expected . 
it will provide very real dollars - and - cents benefits to Canadians and represents part of this government ' s balanced and measured approach to building a stronger economy and a more secure society . 
some measures in Bill C - 28 are an investment in key social areas that our improved finances have made possible . 
it is only right that Canadians should benefit directly from a balancing of the books ; a balancing to which they have contributed . 
bill C - 28 will enrich the CHST cash floor , it will make post - secondary education more affordable and it will benefit charitable organizations , those who donate to them and those they serve . 
bill C - 28 also includes a range of technical tax amendments which are neither insubstantial nor tinkering . 
they will improve the functioning of our tax system which is both fair and economically beneficial . 
it will introduce a new refundable tax credit for film and video production services rendered in Canada , which is expected to provide $ 55 million in direct benefits in the area of job training growth to key cultural industries . 
each of the measures in Bill C - 28 meets a real public interest . 
in order that Canadians may reap its benefits as soon as possible , I urge honourable senators to give speedy passage to this bill . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Simard , debate adjourned . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Dan Hays rose pursuant to notice of March 17 , 1998 : 
honourable senators , between January 7 and 10 , 1998 , I had the honour of leading Canada ' s delegation of parliamentarians to the sixth annual meeting of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum hosted by the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea , in Seoul . 
i tabled the delegation ' s report in both official languages in the Senate on March 17 , 1998 . 
the group was officially established at a meeting in Tokyo in January 1993 , under the direction of the Honourable Yasuhiro Nakasone , the former prime minister of Japan , at which meeting parliamentarians from 15 countries discussed matters of shared interest . 
in 1997 , Canada hosted the fifth annual meeting , in Vancouver , a meeting that produced the Vancouver Declaration which set forth the common vision shared by member countries belonging to the organization . 
this vision , together with the underpinning document , the Tokyo Declaration , approved at the first meeting of the forum , sets out the principal purpose and conviction of the organization , which is increased dialogue among parliamentarians of the Asia - Pacific region . 
the purpose is to add a new and essential dimension to regional cooperation . 
what transpires in the Asia - Pacific region is of importance to Canada . 
concerns over the deterioration of our world environment , stabilization of capital and financial markets in the Asia - Pacific region , the security of the Korean peninsula , the efforts to rid the world of anti - personnel land - mines , the impact of technology , the requirement for fair trading practices and the elimination of official corruption are a few of the issues addressed by the APPF . 
the sixth meeting adopted 18 resolutions , two of which were put forth by the Canadian delegation . 
the meeting recognized the importance of the Convention on the Prohibition on the Use , Stockpiling , Production and Transfer of Anti - personnel Mines and their Destruction signed in Ottawa in December 1997 . 
the meeting adopted the Canadian resolution which strongly encouraged the ratification of the convention and called for progress to be made towards the goals of the convention . 
this is all the more remarkable , honourable senators , because of the membership in the organization of countries such as the United States and China , who did not sign the convention but did agree to this resolution put forward by Canada . 
this was a significant achievement by the Canadian delegation , in particular considering the sensitivity of the issue on the Korean peninsula . 
the meeting also adopted the Canadian resolution which encouraged APEC ' s member economies to further develop the use of learning technologies . 
this resolution was mindful of the importance of education and of the goal for total literacy in the Asia - Pacific region by the year 2010 . 
moreover , our delegation gave four thematic presentations on the following topics : official corruption , a multilateral point of view ; ridding the world of the scourge of land - mines , the Ottawa process and beyond ; reducing greenhouse gases : the issues for Canada and Asia ; and the use of learning technologies . 
these were well received by the meeting , and served as useful background documents for discussion purposes . 
i also had the honour of presenting a report to the meeting on the APEC summit chaired by Canada and held in Vancouver on November 21 to 25 , 1997 . 
it allows Canadian parliamentarians from all political parties to be engaged in discussion about different political and economic values manifested in the region . 
in light of the impact of globalization on our domestic policies , knowledge of these matters is indispensable to parliamentarians in their work as legislators and policy - makers . 
this was historic and important because of the significance of his election , the first genuine transfer of power in that country since the founding of Korea in 1948 . 
in closing , I would like to thank my colleagues on the Canadian delegation , Senator Donald Oliver , Maud Debien , MP for Laval East , John Maloney , MP for Erie - Lincoln , and Ian McClelland , MP for Edmonton Southwest . 
i also wish to thank our staff : 
Mr. Rumas , the outgoing executive secretary , acted as a special advisor to the delegation . 
i particularly wish to thank him for his many years of devotion to the association . 
he was instrumental in establishing the association and contributed to the success of our delegations over many years . 
on motion of Senator Berntson , for Senator Oliver , debate adjourned . 
the senate adjourned until Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 57 
Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
coastal Community Network 
sixth Annual Conference Held in Duncan , British Columbia 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
security and Intelligence 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Engage Services and to Travel Presented 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
eighteenth Report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix 
library of Parliament 
second Report of Joint Committee Presented 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
first Reading 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
canada Evidence Act 
criminal Code 
Canadian Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Amendments from Commons 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Notice of Motion 
canada Forces Day 
proclamation of Day of Recognition - Notice of Motion 
agriculture and forestry 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
transport 
Lerner Report on Cancellation of Pearson Airport Agreements - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
industry 
knowledge of Prime Minister of Names of Prospective Recipients of Order of Canada - Government Position 
human Rights 
representation of Visible Minorities in Federal Public Service - Government Position 
public Works 
availability of Elite Computer Bug - Busting Team for Year 2000 - Government Position 
finance 
appropriation of Senators ' Pension Moneys to Fund Possible Senate Elections in Alberta - Government Position 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV Canada Contract Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Government Position 
health 
addition of Caffeine to Soft Drinks - Government Position 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Continued 
agriculture 
motion Urging Deferral of Licensing of Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone Pending Study - Debate Concluded 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Acting Speaker , Eymard G . Corbin , in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
coastal Community Network 
sixth Annual Conference Held in Duncan , British Columbia 
hon. Pat Carney : 
headquartered in Ucluelet , the CCN is comprised of the cities , municipalities , regional districts and aboriginal communities which border tidewater on B.C. ' s 25,000 kilometres of coast . 
in attendance at this year ' s meeting were MPs from the West and East Coasts , British Columbian MLAs , and provincial cabinet ministers . 
the theme of this year ' s conference was " Partnerships . " 
two full - day forums were held , one to develop partnership principles for the work of communities with federal and provincial governments , and the other to explore and to promote native and non - native partnerships within communities . 
this year , for the first time , representatives of coastal communities on the East Coast were also present , adding greatly to our understanding of marine policy across Canada . 
other sessions provided information on topics such as kelp harvesting , the sports fishery , ecosystems mapping , the provincial government ' s new Crown corporation , Fisheries Renewal B.C. , and federal and provincial involvement in coastal zone management under the Oceans Strategy . 
in my remarks to the panel , entitled , " Roles for Federal and Provincial Governments and Communities , " I made four suggestions , all of which were adopted as resolutions . 
they were , first , that the CCN urge the federal government to further explore the joint management of Pacific fisheries with the provincial government , including a commitment to both the mandate and the money ; second , that the CCN urge Ottawa to support the equity or fair share principle which reflects Canada ' s interest in the Pacific Salmon Treaty in community negotiations ; third , that the CCN urge the federal Minister of Fisheries and Oceans to implement the House of Commons Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans West Coast report which reflected what the coastal communities had asked for during the committee ' s tour of the West Coast ; and , fourth , that MPs , senators and MLAs representing B.C. ' s coastal regions form a coastal parliamentarians ' caucus which will meet at the CCN ' s annual conferences to discuss issues of concern to our coastal communities . 
there is a great deal of interest in getting this parliamentarians ' caucus up and running . 
my office is now working with the CCN to enlist B.C. MPs and MLAs from coastal ridings to participate once a year in an informal caucus meeting linked to the CCN conference , and to set up an informal information network between our offices . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
security and Intelligence 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Engage Services and to Travel Presented 
hon. John G . Bryden , Deputy Chairman of the Special Committee on Security and Intelligence , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 
the Special Committee on Security and Intelligence has the honour to present its 
first REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized by the Senate on March 26 , 1998 to examine matters relating to the threat posed to Canada by terrorism and the counter - terrorism activities of the Government of Canada , and to present its final report no later than September 29 , 1998 , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of the Committee ' s examination and to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such examination . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operations of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration are appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Bryden , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration on Thursday next , May 7 , 1998 . 
hon. John G . Bryden , Deputy Chairman of the Special Committee on Security and Intelligence , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 
the Special Committee on Security and Intelligence has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your committee , which was authorized by the Senate on March 26 , 1998 to examine matters relating to the threat posed to Canada by terrorism and the counter - terrorism activities of the Government of Canada , and to present its final report no later than September 29 , 1998 , respectfully requests that , notwithstanding rule 92 ( 2 ) , it be empowered to hold its meetings in camera for the purpose of hearing witnesses and gathering specialized or sensitive information . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Bryden , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration on Thursday next , May 7 , 1998 . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
eighteenth Report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the eighteenth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration regarding the various committee budgets for the fiscal year 1998 - 99 . 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate . 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
library of Parliament 
second Report of Joint Committee Presented 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the second report of the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament . 
Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 
the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
in accordance with its Order of Reference from the Senate of Wednesdsay , March 18 , 1998 and from the House of Commons of Thursday , February 26 , 1998 , the Committee has considered Vote 10 under PARLIAMENT in the Main Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 1999 , and reports the same . 
a copy of the relevant Minutes of Proceedings ( Meeting No. 3 ) is tabled in the House of Commons . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Gigant è s , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave from the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , May 6 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I should like to pose the usual question to the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
has an understanding been reached between the two sides as to the hour of adjournment tomorrow , in view of the plans of a number of committees to meet as early as 3:30 p.m. ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , we have had great success in ensuring that the chamber rises prior to 3:15 p.m. on Wednesdays , even though Senator Murray did not ask his question last week . 
i see no difficulty with committees being able to sit tomorrow at the appropriate time . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
first Reading 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) presented Bill S - 16 , to implement an agreement between Canada and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam , an agreement between Canada and the Republic of Croatia and a convention between Canada and the Republic of Chile , for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , May 7 , 1998 . 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 15 , to amend the Canada Shipping Act and to make consequential amendment to other acts . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading Thursday next , May 7 , 1998 . 
canada Evidence Act 
criminal Code 
Canadian Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Amendments from Commons 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons returning Bill S - 5 , to amend the Canada Evidence Act and the Criminal Code in respect of persons with disabilities , to amend the Canadian Human Rights Act in respect of persons with disabilities and other matters and to make consequential amendments to other acts , and acquainting the Senate that they had passed this bill with the following amendments , to which they desire the concurrence of the Senate : 
clause 2 
replace lines 8 to 12 on page 3 with the following : 
" dependency and who , for a sexual purpose , counsels or incites that person to touch , without that person ' s consent , his or her own body , the body of the person who so counsels or incites , or the body of any other person , directly or indirectly , with a part of the body or with an object , " 
replace line 12 on page 4 with the following : 
" ( c ) the accused counsels or incites " 
clause 16 
replace , in the English version , line 40 on page 9 with the following : 
" objectives the programs , plan or arrange - " 
clause 20 
replace lines 11 and 12 on page 11 with the following : 
" ( 2 ) Subsections 27 ( 2 ) to ( 4 ) of Act are replaced by the following : 
( 2 ) The Commission may , on application or on its own initiative , by order , issue a guideline setting out the extent to which and the manner in which , in the opinion of the Commission , any provision of this Act applies in a class of cases described in the guideline . " 
add after line 19 on page 11 the following : 
" ( 4 ) Each guideline issued under subsection ( 2 ) shall be published in Part II of the Canada Gazette . " 
clause 23 
replace , in the English version , line 47 on page 11 with the following : 
" request the Chairperson of the Tribunal to " 
clause 27 
replace lines 11 to 18 on page 13 with the following : 
" ( 3 ) The Chairperson and Vice - chairperson must be members in good standing of the bar of a province or the Chambre des notaires du Qu é bec for at least ten years and at least two of the other members of the Tribunal must be members in good standing of the bar of a province or the Chambre des notaires du Qu é bec . " 
clause 39 
add after line 4 on page 28 the following : 
" ( 4.1 ) 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , message placed on Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting . 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Notice of Motion 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , May 7 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Senate endorses and supports the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada ; 
that the Senate for humanitarian reasons urges the Government of Canada and the Governments of the Provinces and of the Territories to comply with these findings and recommendations ; and 
that a copy of this motion be forwarded to each federal , provincial and territorial Minister of Health . 
canada Forces Day 
proclamation of Day of Recognition - Notice of Motion 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
agriculture and forestry 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Eugene Whelan , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , moved : 
that the Standing Committee on Agriculture and Forestry have power to sit today at 3:15 p.m. even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
transport 
Lerner Report on Cancellation of Pearson Airport Agreements - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
question PERIOD 
industry 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i should first like to thank the minister for the initiatives he announced last week in south - western Nova Scotia to help the economy of that region . 
i have heard good comments about those initiatives , and I wish to pass those comments on to the minister . 
my question refers to the government - sponsored study which recommends further cuts in transfer payments in order to speed up the relocation of Atlantic Canadians to the more prosperous regions of Canada . 
this sounds very much like a Reform Party action plan . 
the recommendation comes as no surprise to many Atlantic Canadians . 
what is surprising is that the government would actually accept this kind of initiative in writing . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I certainly repudiate the findings of the study . 
the honourable senator will know that studies of this nature are commissioned by Industry Canada from time to time , and that the findings of anyone given a mandate to undertake such a study by no means reflect the government ' s position . 
at the same time , I wish to thank the Honourable Senator Comeau for his kind words with respect to the announcements that were made in south - western Nova Scotia , and I thank him also for being present for those announcements . 
senator Comeau : 
as a supplementary , the minister responsible for Industry Canada has on occasion made some rather negative comments about Atlantic Canada . 
more recently , the Governor of the Bank of Canada urged a kind of economic cleansing of Atlantic Canada . 
is the minister prepared to admit that the ultraright wing of the once - great , socially minded Liberal Party has now taken over , and that the Preston Mannings and Jesse Helms should move over because the Liberals are taking over their territory ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , that is really reaching - even south of the border . 
by no means is that a correct statement . 
i should like to indicate to my honourable friend that the trends are in the right direction . 
he refers specifically to the province of Nova Scotia where the unemployment rate , year over year , is falling . 
i particularly wish to mention my very pleasant visit to the Yarmouth area and the Pubnicos , as they are known . 
i wish to pay tribute to the people of East Pubnico , West Pubnico and Pubnico itself for the wonderful initiatives that they have taken , both in the fishery and in boat building . 
those are the kinds of initiatives which will serve Atlantic Canada well - Nova Scotia in this particular instance . 
together with the initiatives that have been taken with regard to Sable Island gas , high technology , and our educational institutions , these initiatives will help level the playing field for that important part of Canada . 
i would encourage my honourable friend to look at the forecasts that have been released by the Bank of Nova Scotia with respect to the economic growth in our home area . 
in a report released in March , the bank said that capital spending to develop Sable Island natural gas is expected to lift Nova Scotia ' s growth to 3 per cent this year , following a 2.4 - per - cent advance in 1997 . 
this performance would mark the best back - to - back economic results in over a decade . 
solid output gains have raised employment over 4 per cent above last year ' s levels , with a 6 - per - cent increase in full - time positions . 
i would encourage my honourable friend and other honourable senators to look with optimism on economic growth in Nova Scotia , and to continue the good work . 
privy Council Office 
knowledge of Prime Minister of Names of Prospective Recipients of Order of Canada - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in The Globe and Mail on Saturday , May 2 , it was reported that journalist and television host Mike Duffy , in answering questions under oath in an Ontario court action against Frank magazine , made the statement that Mr. Chr é tien had told him privately that his treatment in the magazine was the reason he had not been named to the Order of Canada . 
this is an interesting revelation in itself because the bestowing of this honour , as The Globe and Mail rightly points out , is not supposed to have anything to do with politics and the Prime Minister . 
who advised the Prime Minister that Mr. Duffy was turned down by the committee which recommends recipients of the Order of Canada ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the committee which recommends recipients of the Order of Canada operates at arm ' s length from the government . 
i have no specific knowledge of the item to which the honourable senator refers . 
i do not know whether the matter would be worth pursuing . 
i would rely on what I have already said , which is that the committee which makes these recommendations acts entirely at arm ' s length from the government . 
senator LeBreton : 
Mr. Duffy said - and I would remind you that this is under oath - that the Prime Minister himself told him why he did not win . 
reportedly under oath , he also stated : 
i have been nominated three times and three times the message came from the PCO on the back channel that " Frank is the reason you ' re not going to get it . " 
would it be correct , therefore , to assume that the Prime Minister got this information from the Clerk of the Privy Council who sits on the Order of Canada selection committee ? 
senator Graham : 
that is a hypothetical question on which I would not care to comment . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , something is clearly wrong here . 
in the infamous Airbus case , we have the Clerk of the Privy Council stating that she did not inform the Prime Minister that the former secretary to the cabinet and chief of staff to former prime minister Brian Mulroney , Mr. Norman Spector , in a personal meeting , well in advance of the November 18 Financial Post story , told the clerk that the RCMP was investigating Mr. Mulroney . 
the clerk apparently did not so advise the Prime Minister , thereby allowing Prime Minister Chr é tien and his aides to keep insisting to this day that he and they were unaware of the investigation until the day the story broke on November 18 , 1995 . 
honourable senators , it stretches credulity that the clerk would advise the Prime Minister that Mr. Duffy would not get an Order of Canada because of Frank magazine , and yet did not advise the Prime Minister that former prime minister Brian Mulroney was the target of an RCMP investigation . 
does the Prime Minister still claim that he did not hear of the Airbus case from the Clerk of the Privy Council or from anyone else for that matter , and only became aware of it the day the story broke in The Financial Post on November 18 , 1995 ? 
senator Graham : 
the answer to the honourable senator ' s question is yes . 
by way of commentary , I would urge all honourable senators to write to the committee and endorse Mike Duffy for the Order of Canada . 
human Rights 
representation of Visible Minorities in Federal Public Service - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the 1997 Annual Report of the Canadian Human Rights Commission severely criticizes the current Liberal government for not promoting racial equality within the federal civil service . 
the report states at page 65 : 
in contrast to the private sector , the share of recruitment of visible minorities by the government has remained consistently below availability . 
on February 25 , 1998 , I pressed the Honourable Leader of the Government in the Senate about my concern regarding the inadequate effort that had been made to meet the government ' s established objective of 9 per cent of visible minorities employed in the federal public service . 
at that time , Senator Graham indicated that he would bring this matter to the attention of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a good question , and I only wish that the chair of Internal Economy was in the chamber . 
perhaps we could return to this question tomorrow and I will urge my friend Senator Rompkey to be prepared for the honourable senator ' s question . 
senator Oliver : 
... visible minorities remain under - represented in many regions , including those where they have a large population from which to draw . 
would Senator Graham explain what measures the government is taking to ensure that visible minorities are properly represented in the federal public service , most notably in senior management ranks where they are conspicuously absent ? 
senator Graham : 
the honourable senator raises a valid point . 
the government is conscious of the representations which he and others have made on this particular point . 
the government is constantly on the lookout for the best kind of talent that can fill these positions . 
i will again bring the honourable senator ' s concerns , as well as the concerns of all senators in this chamber , to the attention of the government . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
we could certainly offer him some good advice . 
senator Graham : 
Yes. 
public Works 
availability of Elite Computer Bug - Busting Team for Year 2000 - Government Position 
hon. Fernand Roberge : 
honourable senators , recently it was reported in the media that all government departments are failing to take advantage of the services of an elite Year 2000 bug - busting team . 
under the initiative of Public Works , the government has organized this elite group of seven major technology companies to help ensure that all critical government systems are serviced prior to the April 1 , 1999 deadline . 
my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
as this situation was reported in the media on April 14 , could he inform us whether the situation remains the same , that not one government department has yet taken advantage of the services of this elite computer bug - busting team ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the best technicians in the land and around the world are working on this particular problem because it is a problem which is common to every nation in the world . 
finance 
appropriation of Senators ' Pension Moneys to Fund Possible Senate Elections in Alberta - Government Position 
hon. Edward M. Lawson : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government of the Senate . 
in The Calgary Herald of April 23 , Preston Manning , in talking about billing Ottawa for Senate elections , is reported as having said : 
ultimately the federal government will have to pay . 
maybe they can take it out of the pension of the retiring senators . 
as a matter of fact , I think the legal term for using pension moneys for any purpose other than pensions is theft by conversion . 
to do that , he would have to steal it . 
i told the employee that he should not think it funny as well , since his pension , I believe , is kept in the same fund as the senators ' pensions and managed by the same people . 
he very quickly agreed that perhaps it was not quite so funny and asked , " It ' s not possible for them to take it , is it ? " 
to which I responded that I was certain in my own mind that this government would never allow pension funds to be used for any purpose other than for pensions . 
the employee asked whether there had ever been other cases of pension moneys being taken out when there was no right to do so . 
i said , " Yes , there were a number of companies , believing there was a surplus , which took the moneys out . " 
he said , " Were they penalized for that ? " 
i said , " In some cases they got away with it ; in many other cases the courts ordered them to put it back . " 
he said , " Well , can you give me a guarantee ? " 
i said , " No , I cannot give you a guarantee that they will not use your pension funds for other purposes , but I can ask a question in the Senate . " 
however , before I am able to do that , he says , " That is what we need , something more to worry about . " 
i agree with that point . 
with respect to retiring senators , sitting senators or other federal civil servants , there is enough stress and anxiety in the workplace without needing to worry about whether some politician will use the moneys for other purposes than for pensions . 
may we have that assurance ? 
hon. Senators : 
hear hear ! 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i would be happy to make that declaration , right here and now , on behalf of the Prime Minister . 
i would go further and say that I sat with Senator Manning , Mr. Preston Manning ' s father , near where you sit at the present time , Senator Lawson , and , in the years that I sat with him in this chamber , I listened attentively to every word he said because he was one of the great orators that have graced this chamber . 
however , I do not recall at any time Ernest Manning making any personal reference about anyone in the country . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Lawson : 
i would add one brief comment to what the government leader has said about Preston Manning ' s attacks on senators . 
i am one of those whom he attacked on that occasion , but in the near future I will give him the opportunity to repeat it in court . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV Canada Contract Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the nation ' s top ranking chief petty officer . 
very few rise to rank of minister , believe me . 
honourable senators are no doubt aware that the Canadian Air Traffic Controllers Association has now overwhelmingly rejected NAV CANADA ' s recent contract offer . 
those who read that offer closely will have noticed that it provides for very generous percentage increases in pay . 
could the minister bring us up to date on the status of this labour dispute and tell us , if he can , whether or not the issues might be safety , rather than money , and , in particular , over time that is required to be worked ? 
at the same time , can he give us some assurance that safety standards will not be lowered should there be a withdrawal of service ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
it would be of paramount importance , of course , for the government to ensure that safety standards are not lowered ; that they are not only maintained but enhanced , it is to be hoped . 
this is a situation that is being monitored by the various ministers who may have a responsibility in this regard , including the Minister of Transport , the Minister of Labour , the Minister of Public Works and Government Services , and so on . 
i do not have a specific answer to my honourable friend ' s question but I would be happy to see if I can obtain further information . 
health 
addition of Caffeine to Soft Drinks - Government Position 
hon. Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I raise an issue which is not a new one , but it appears to have some impetus from the government at present . 
at a time when we are attempting to keep our health costs down ; when we have a medical system that needs to look at prevention rather than cure ; and when the dollars are short , can the Leader of the Government in the Senate explain why the government is seriously considering allowing companies to add caffeine to non - caffeine soft drinks ? 
i understand that , at present , the government is considering a move to allow bottlers of citrus drinks to add caffeine to their soft drinks . 
i would remind honourable senators that caffeine is an addictive additive with side - effects that we are not yet sure of . 
would the government confirm that they are doing this , and if they are , that they will not proceed without a full and adequate public debate on the issue ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Andreychuk : 
as a supplementary , if there has been some active investigation of this proposal , and if there is a propensity towards allowing the bottlers to do this , I would ask the Leader of the Government to include in his answer whether or not the costs to our medical care system have been factored into that investigation . 
this is not simply an issue of allowing an industry free rein but , rather , one of what will be the compensating costs that must be factored into our budgets for the medical aspect . 
studies have been done on the effects of caffeine and the costs to our health . 
however , if we are to expand its use beyond its natural sources and natural products , or beyond those already within our system , we need to know what the costs will be in other ways , rather than simply the direct benefits to an expanded industry . 
senator Graham : 
that would involve interesting research , and I would be happy to determine whether or not the Department of Health has embarked on studying this matter , and whether it is up to date . 
again , I will bring forward whatever information I can find . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , before proceeding to other items of business , I would present to you two pages from the House of Commons who are participating in the exchange with the Senate . 
from Montreal , Quebec , is Erin Matheson , who is enrolled in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Ottawa . 
she is majoring in criminology . 
welcome to the Senate . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
welcome to the Senate . 
orders OF THE DAY 
tobacco Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fifth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology ( Bill S - 8 , to amend the Tobacco Act ( content regulation ) with certain amendments ) presented in the Senate on April 30 , 1998 . 
honourable senators , I will take only a moment of your time to speak to this report on Bill S - 8 which I tabled Thursday on behalf of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
honourable senators will recall that this bill was sponsored by our former colleague the Honourable Stanley Haidasz . 
it is not dissimilar to a bill he sponsored and which received second reading during the Thirty - fifth Parliament , but which died in committee upon dissolution of the Thirty - fifth Parliament about 13 months ago . 
this bill received second reading here on December 12 and was referred to our committee , where we held three meetings and heard five witnesses . 
Dr. Haidasz was the opening and the closing witness at our hearings . 
between his first appearance on February 25 and his final appearance on March 25 , he was overtaken by his 75 th birthday and had to retire from the Senate . 
he suggested the amendments which are before you in this report of the committee and to which I will come in a moment . 
bill S - 8 attacks nicotine addiction . 
it would do so , first , by substantially reducing the nicotine level in tobacco products . 
it would also limit the quantity of cancer - producing tars which contain harmful additives , and reconstituted tobacco which can also contain harmful substances . 
most of the evidence before the committee touched on the question of the likely consumer reaction if this bill were to become law . 
if nicotine levels were substantially reduced , would smokers simply smoke more cigarettes in order to get the nicotine fix that they need ; or would they go to the contraband market for cigarettes with a higher nicotine content , such as , for example , American - made cigarettes ? 
on the first question , a witness from the Department of Health reminded us that nicotine is the only tobacco constituent that causes smokers to continue smoking , even when they know it is bad for their health . 
this witness told us that a typical smoker who is nicotine dependent needs a daily intake of about 20 milligrams of nicotine , and he or she smokes cigarettes that deliver between 0.7 and 1.4 milligrams of nicotine . 
there you have the typical smoker who would need to smoke , or feels he or she would need to smoke , a pack of 20 to 25 cigarettes a day . 
what would be the impact of this bill , with its substantially reduced nicotine content , on the behaviour of smokers ? 
the second question was whether smokers would turn to a contraband market for cigarettes with a higher nicotine content . 
in that regard , we heard witnesses from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and from the Department of National Revenue . 
they told us that any significant increase in the rate of tar and / or nicotine would likely provide an incentive for smokers to seek alternate and perhaps contraband sources of tobacco . 
we know that higher taxes in the early 1990 s produced this effect . 
however , our witnesses from the RCMP and Revenue Canada could not seem to identify the point at which lower nicotine levels or higher taxes would trigger a decision on the part of smokers to go to the contraband market for their fix . 
while the bill had moral support from official sources such as the Department of Health , the police , and the Department of National Revenue , reservations were expressed by these witnesses before the committee . 
against those reservations , we had the unambiguous testimony or unequivocal support of the Non - Smokers ' Rights Association who made two major points when they appeared before us . 
the first was , although they agreed with the principle of regulating nicotine content , they questioned whether Dr. Haidasz had the precise limits right . 
a witness from the Non - Smokers ' Rights Association drew an analogy between this legislation and seatbelt legislation . 
his point was that , once safer designs are required by law , the whole nature of the market becomes fundamentally altered and limits can be revised later on in the light of experience . 
the second point made was that Bill S - 8 with its far lower limits on nicotine content would vastly assist in stopping the onset of addiction . 
obviously , the witness was thinking about young people becoming addicted to nicotine and cigarettes . 
in addition , the witnesses made the point that we need to encourage new nicotine products that lack the dangerous components of cigarettes , such as tars , and that are not attractive to adolescents . 
the amendment suggested to us by our former colleague Senator Haidasz and which we adopted in committee is rather a technical amendment to add greater certainty to the definition in the bill . 
Dr. Haidasz proposed , and we agreed , that the proposed sections 5 and 6.1 be amended to read " manufacture or sell " instead of simply " manufacture . " 
he and others felt that , if the provisions related only to tobacco products manufactured in Canada , this could open the way for products which did not and did not need to respect the limits in the bill to be imported and sold . 
in order to cover items domestically manufactured and imported , he suggested , and we agreed , to amend the bill to read " manufacture or sell " instead of simply " manufacture . " 
with those few words , honourable senators , on behalf of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , I commend this bill to your support . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Gigant è s , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading Thursday next . 
inter - Provincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore , seconded by the Honourable Senator Butts : 
that the Senate urge the governments of the provinces and territories to ensure that their laws respecting the enforcement of inter - provincial subpoenas explicitly provide that they are applicable , not only to courts of law , but also to commissions of inquiry ; 
that the Senate also urge the government of any province or territory to amend such laws where they are not clearly applicable to commissions of inquiry in order to remove any doubt ; and 
that a message be sent to the Assemblies of the provincial and territorial legislatures to acquaint them accordingly . - ( 
honourable Senator Berntson ) . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore on this important issue . 
the manner in which he has addressed it is also important . 
the honourable senator raises the point that commissions of inquiry sometimes find it necessary to serve subpoenas outside their jurisdictions . 
more and more , commissions of inquiry are set up to get at the truth of contentious issues . 
to do that , procedures must be in place so that all those who might have some knowledge or information to offer to the commission related to the issues of study are called to give evidence in in a timely manner so that the commission may have before it all the relevant evidence . 
in the Westray Mines issue , two witnesses could not be compelled to appear before the commission of inquiry because Nova Scotia did not have legislation allowing for extraterritorial service of subpoenas . 
later , the issue was more or less compounded by the fact that the definition in the Ontario law was not clear as to whether it covered a commission of inquiry such as the one set up in Nova Scotia . 
senator Moore has pointed out , and rightly so , that we should not add to the tragedy suffered by victims such as those in the Westray matter . 
senator Moore , in the event that provinces will contemplate that such an issue could arise again , is urging the Senate to bring to the attention of all the provinces the fact that their laws should be complementary . 
therefore , we should not wait until an issue arises . 
i commend Senator Moore for his initiative . 
however , I wish to comment on the question of technicalities to which he made reference . 
i do not look at the issues as technicalities but as safeguards . 
we cannot allow indiscriminate processes within a commission of inquiry . 
we would not want subpoenas to be served indiscriminately . 
we need a process which legitimately allows the administration of justice to further its investigation of the issues under inquiry . 
in the future , I hope that we will look at rules and procedures in law not as technicalities but as safeguards . 
however , we must ensure that those safeguards are appropriate and adequate , that they support the administration of justice , and that they do not bring the administration of justice into disrepute . 
it is also important that those who have suffered , such as the families in the Westray Mine disaster , are not subjected to needless grief and disappointment , thereby increasing their tragedy . 
justice should not be delayed , nor should it be frustrated by procedures . 
discerning the facts and the truth should be paramount . 
one would have expected that these two gentlemen , who were responsible for a corporation in a community , would have come forward of their own accord and that , in the event that they did not , there would be a means by which they would be compelled to come forward . 
the Westray Mine case forced the Nova Scotia government to change its procedures . 
it also forced Ontario to look at its legislation . 
in Saskatchewan , in 1992 , the LaChance / Nerland Commission of Inquiry forced changes to the Saskatchewan law to compel a prisoner from the Stony Mountain Penitentiary to be brought forward to a 1992 inquiry in Prince Albert . 
these are two examples which indicate that changes in our laws were made only once we found a fact situation which frustrated justice . 
surely , in today ' s system , it is more appropriate that laws be made uniform and that there be some cooperation between the provinces in anticipation of these situations . 
this would reduce the frustration to commissions of inquiry . 
more particularly , it would reduce the frustration to any of those who find themselves in a tragic situation which warrants a full and adequate assessment through a commission of inquiry . 
i understand that several provinces and the territories have not complied to make their intraprovincial subpoena legislation broad enough to cover commissions of inquiry . 
therefore , this motion is timely . 
while we respect provincial authorities and the right of provinces to administer our system of justice , most citizens are not aware of the complexity of the issues and simply want justice . 
therefore , I believe that there is a need at this time , because of the Westray case , and because of the Nerland case in Saskatchewan , to ensure that justice is not brought into disrepute by virtue of the fact that there are some inconsistencies from province to province . 
it is in the best interests of the provinces to tackle this situation . 
i wish to commend the Uniform Law Conference which will soon be meeting in Halifax . 
this issue is on their agenda and I believe it is timely for them to deal with it . 
they have considered this matter for some time , as have ministries of justice across Canada . 
it is to be hoped that they will move more expeditiously and make adequate recommendations upon which all jurisdictions can comment and then move to enact legislation . 
we want justice in Canada to be seen to be done as well as being done . 
in my opinion , Mr. Justice Richard took the right decision when he decided not to delay justice but rather reported without hearing the evidence of two witnesses . 
one can only speculate on what might have happened had those two witnesses been compelled to testify . 
one does not know whether it would have enhanced the issue of justice ; one only knows that the families of the victims of Westray should not have been preoccupied with that issue but should , rather , have been able to focus their attention on the issue of whether justice was being done and on ensuring that such a tragedy is never repeated . 
hon. Mary Butts : 
honourable senators , I rise in support of the motion introduced in this chamber on March 31 with regard to the enforcement of inter - provincial subpoenas and the necessity of acquainting provincial and territorial legislatures with this problem . 
in substance , the motion asks that five provinces and one territory amend their respective statutes so that an injustice such as the incomplete ending of the Westray Mine inquiry will never be repeated in Canada . 
the motion will require that these provinces change their inter - provincial summonses acts by broadening the definition of the word " court " to include quasi - judicial bodies such as commissions of inquiry . 
if this loophole in the law of Ontario had been closed , the CEO of Curragh Resources and the president of Westray Coal would have been obliged to appear as witnesses at the inquiry in Nova Scotia and the full truth surrounding the disaster might have been revealed to the 26 grieving families who lost sons , husbands or fathers in the Westray Mine . 
i ask the Senate to allow this motion to go forward quickly so that the text can be forwarded to provincial legislatures . 
it is the intention , also , that the motion and some background information be forwarded to the president of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada to be deliberated at the meeting in Halifax scheduled for this summer . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
agriculture 
motion Urging Deferral of Licensing of Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone Pending Study - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Whelan , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . : 
that the Senate urges the Government to defer licensing the use of Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone ( rBGH ) to increase the milk production of the Canadian dairy herd for at least one year , and thereafter until such time as scientific studies have been designed , tested and completed whose conclusions enable the Government to either precisely identify for Canadians the long - term risks to public health or , in the alternative , to publicly assure them that the use of this growth hormone will not affect their individual health . - ( 
honourable Senator Milne ) . 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , I wish to speak today in support of Senator Whelan ' s motion to defer licensing of the hormone recombinant bovine growth hormone , rBGH , for at least one year , and thereafter until such time as scientific studies have been completed . 
rBST is a synthetic growth hormone produced in a laboratory . 
cows produce this hormone on their own . 
scientific studies have shown that injecting cows with this synthetic hormone causes an increase in a cancer promoter called IGF - 1 . 
this cancer promoter is known to cause cell proliferation and tumour growth , particularly in the human colon and breast . 
many scientists have expressed strong concerns with regard to cows being injected with this synthetic hormone . 
on April 21 , 1998 , Dr. Samuel Epstein from the University of Illinois stated that there is evidence to suggest that consumption of milk from cows that have been injected with rBGH poses risks of breast and colon cancer . 
there is opposition to the use of rBST by scientists who say that cows injected with this hormone suffer from infections such as mastitis and that their life span is shortened by as much as two years . 
many farmers are forced to inject their animals with powerful antibiotics to fight these infections and other side - effects from the use of rBST . 
critics , including the Massachusetts State Agriculture Commission in 1989 , have called it " crack for cows . " 
although health protection branch officials state that the milk from this hormone is safe for human consumption , they are still assessing its impact on animal health . 
detractors say that rBGH has roughly the same effect on cattle as steroids have on athletes . 
therefore , in the interests of protecting Canadians from the perceived detrimental health hazards caused by the use of this synthetic hormone , I support Senator Whelan ' s motion to defer licensing of the synthetic recombinant bovine growth hormone . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I support Senator Whelan ' s motion . 
much of our food now contains supplements which have been fed to animals . 
Oprah Winfrey ran into opposition from the food lobby when she mentioned that some of the feed supplements being fed to cattle may have come from animals that might have had Mad Cow Disease . 
however , I am not trying to compare this with Mad Cow Disease . 
honourable senators , I do not think there is any need to increase milk production . 
if we were running short of milk , or children were going without milk , or the price of milk had gone through the roof because our supply was less than the demand and we needed to increase our supply , I could understand the argument . 
however , those examples do not exist in reality . 
certainly , no one can produce proof that the hormone will not do any harm 10 or 15 years from now . 
anyone who is at all familiar with our research into different cancers and diseases which exist today have seen enough evidence that changes in our environment or our food that were put into motion 10 or 20 years ago are having an effect today . 
perhaps the most convincing argument for me is that the Dairy Association of Alberta has made a presentation to the National Dairy Association suggesting that this additive not be approved . 
interestingly enough , representatives from this aggressive provincial association argue contrary to the position of the national association . 
these people are well known to me ; they are good friends , and very modern dairy people . 
they do not want it . 
that is enough for me , in addition to the normal fear that I always have when someone says , " Hold your nose and shut your eyes ; this is good for you . " 
i support Senator Whelan in his motion . 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I wish to add to what Senators Chalifoux and Taylor have said today . 
i am very concerned about the licensing of recombinant bovine growth hormone , or rBGH . 
the proposed use of this hormone may afford the Senate an opportunity similar to the one afforded by the hemp discussion to bring an issue of concern before the Canadian people in a manner that will give them a chance to respond and take part . 
this is an issue which has very serious ramifications , and which does require sober second thought . 
the hormone rBGH is injected into cows to increase the amount of milk that they produce . 
it is usually given after the ninth week of lactation . 
as Senator Whelan described in his speech last December , there is as yet no guarantee or any reliable scientific evidence that this drug is safe for cows or for humans . 
in addition , milk is one of the foods considered essential for food nutrition and it is consumed by all segments of society . 
do we want our children or our grandchildren to be drinking a substance that is not guaranteed to be safe , that may contain a form of insulin or growth hormone ? 
senator Whelan reminded us that shades of the thalidomide experience can be detected in this issue . 
senator Spivak also gave an excellent speech on this subject in March , in which she outlined what could be described as questionable behaviour by Health Canada and its subsidiary , the Health Protection Branch . 
these organizations are trusted by Canadians to protect our health interests , and yet their actions on this issue raise serious questions . 
public servants are apparently not sharing information with each other at appropriate times and may not be representing the best interests of Canadians at Codex meetings . 
the CODEX Alimentarius was established by the World Trade Organization and the Food and Agricultural Organization to develop standards for grown and manufactured food production . 
luckily , as Senator Spivak pointed out , CODEX has not yet approved rBGH , and we do not need to worry immediately about this hormone entering Canada from international trade avenues . 
my friends , I see two different areas of concern with the use of rBGH in Canada . 
the first is its effects on humans , and the second is its effects on cattle . 
as Senator Whelan mentioned , the long term consequences are unknown . 
to quote the senator directly : 
unfortunately , a reassessment of the results of the single experiment on which this assumption was based shows that the experimental pasteurization temperatures were much higher than the temperatures used in normal practice in a dairy . 
there is presently no proof that commercial pasteurization destroys rBGH in milk . 
we do know that rBGH milk contains a higher than normal level of insulin growth factor one , a substance that has been linked to prostate , colon and stomach cancer . 
further , there are concerns that this IGF - 1 might also lead to a type of diabetes . 
these are a few of the questions that have been raised about the possible effects of humans drinking milk from dairy cows injected with this hormone . 
it is impossible to know whether these issues have any merit because there has been so little testing of this product . 
i emphasize to you that with a product that is being consumed by all ages , but especially by young children , would it not be better to have a full idea of the effects rather than receive unwelcome surprises in the future ? 
my second point is the effect of rBGH on cattle . 
as I am sure most of you know , milk does not really come in plastic bags from the grocery store . 
a cow lactates after calving , and the milk produced during this lactation period is sold to customers in various forms . 
obviously , dairy farmers wish to increase the amount and length of lactation . 
however , as in any business , increased production must be balanced against increased cost . 
this is one of the quandaries with respect to rBGH . 
the physical stress that it can cause to the cow is incredible , and the resulting cost to the farmer can be enormous . 
one of the problems experienced by cows using rBGH is an increased rate of mastitis , an inflammation of the udder caused by , among other things , a high rate of milk production . 
while the reports of mastitis rates are mixed , even the chemical company that produces the hormone declares that this hormone directly increases mastitis in cows . 
the sufferers are then treated with antibiotics , which can be passed into the milk supply and then on to the consumers of the milk . 
while testing is done to ensure that the levels of antibiotic contained in the milk are not high , there are still trace amounts contained in the final product . 
honourable senators , we have all heard about increasing incidence of antibiotic resistance among our population . 
this is leading to the creation of super viruses that cannot be treated by conventional methods . 
trace amounts of antibiotics in our food only serve to compound this problem . 
as one dairy farmer I contacted about rBGH said : 
we are now seeing the adverse effects of antibiotics in the human body . 
a second problem with this hormone and cows has to do with the stress of lactation and infertility . 
during the first few months of lactation , cows are generally infertile , and milk production slowly declines after this period and the cow again becomes fertile . 
this , of course , has financial consequences , not only for future milk production from that cow , but also for herd replacement . 
another dairy farmer with whom I discussed this issue said : 
when you start pushing these good families - 
- of cows - 
- too far , you soon eliminate them by shortening their lifetimes to the point of one or two lactations . 
this sometimes does not give you time to get a female to carry on the family before the mother is butchered . 
you get a situation that can best be described as the " Flush - a - Bye " kind . 
linked to this problem with the dams is an increase of the twin births of calves . 
twin calves are much smaller in size and are often born prematurely . 
the problems with this are obvious - less chance of survival . 
moreover , the cows produced by mothers who are taking this hormone have an increased chance of themselves being infertile , which only puts further economic pressure on farmers as they strive to replace and improve their herds . 
honourable senators , there are many more adverse effects on the health of cows injected with rBGH than I have had time to describe for you , and every single farmer that I contacted about this matter was opposed to its introduction . 
the full tale seems to be a horror story leading up to an early death for the cows involved , often before they have been milking long enough for the farmer to even get back the cost of raising the cow . 
honourable senators , at this point I do not wish to totally prevent this drug from coming into Canada . 
all I am asking , as Senator Whelan has already done , is that we do not allow the use of rBGH until all the evidence is in . 
the first step we can take to slow down this approval process is to send the matter of rBGH use to committee . 
we would then be able to have various witnesses appear before the committee , and properly hear the scientific evidence and arguments for and against the drug . 
i understand that long - term testing of the effects of rBGH use has only been done for a period of 90 days . 
as we are looking at a product here , milk that will be consumed by humans indefinitely , we must know more about the long - term effects of the use of this drug . 
the tests on cattle have also been very limited in duration . 
honourable senators , I ask you to remember this speech and the ones that have been given by other honourable senators about the effects of rBGH the next time you eat a piece of cheese , or tuck into a bowl of ice cream , or go to your refrigerator to get a glass of milk for your grandchildren . 
the hormone rBGH is something that could substantially affect our basic food supply , and we need to fully understand the consequences of its long - term use before we accept it for use in Canada . 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , I , too , would like to make a few remarks on this extremely interesting subject . 
the motion before us on the veterinary drug , recombinant bovine somatotropin , goes directly to the matter of public health . 
it asks that the government defer granting a notice of compliance for rBST under the Food and Drug Act until studies determine the long - term risks to public health . 
the motion also suggests that those studies may assure Canadians that the milk on their breakfast table , if produced with the help of rBST , is as safe as the milk they now drink . 
on the face of it , the motion is a simple request and a reasonable one . 
less than a century ago , milk and milk products were among our most dangerous foods . 
epidemics of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers , scarlet fever , diptheria , poliomyelitis and cholera were traced to milk and other dairy products . 
in North America , the peak of these epidemics occurred in 1914 when , in the U.S. alone , 55 outbreaks of milk - borne disease were recorded . 
from a public health standpoint , clearly the disease - bearing potential of a dietary staple was unacceptable . 
something had to be done and a great deal was done . 
laws were passed to require pasteurization of milk and to ban the sale of raw milk . 
the Ontario law was passed in 1927 . 
dairy farmers and dairy producers adopted new practices and reduced contamination of pathogenic microbes . 
Refrigerated storage of milk in stores and in homes minimized bacterial growth . 
today , milk and dairy products are some of our safest foods . 
rBST produces more milk , not better milk . 
in many other countries , health regulators have looked at the data on rBST and have judged it safe . 
the drug was first approved for commercial use more than a decade ago in South Africa . 
in fact , in the 1980 s , milk from test herds of cattle was pooled with other milk and sold to consumers in the U.S. , as it was for a time in this country . 
in 1985 , the U.S. FDA concluded that milk and meat from rBST - treated cows was safe for consumption . 
twelve years ago , Health Canada ' s Bureau of Veterinary Drugs came to the same conclusion . 
in August of 1990 , the U.S. FDA , in an unprecedented move , published data in the Journal of Science on the safety of the drug before granting its approval . 
in the same year , articles in the Journal of the American Medical Association urged U.S. physicians to reassure the public about rBST in milk safety . 
however , based on the evidence before it , the panel did conclude that as currently used in the United States - that is , only on experimental herds of cattle - milk and meat from rBST - treated cows was as safe as that from untreated cows . 
as recently as February of this year , a joint expert committee on food additives convened by the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization revisited the issue of residues in milk and dairy products that could result from rBST use . 
to date , we have only a summary of this committee ' s conclusion . 
the summary contains the noteworthy caution that it was subject to extensive editing and should not be quoted or referred to until publication of the full report . 
however , both the FAO and the drug manufacturer , Monsanto , very quickly reported that the expert committee concluded there are no further safety and health concerns related to rBST residues . 
we have before us a motion which challenges the conclusions of those regulators in many other countries and those judgments of reputable scientific bodies . 
the motion implies that the safety issue was not resolved through long - term research . 
one explanation is benign , the other very troubling . 
the benign explanation is that the knowledge available through medical science is never static . 
new research continually provides reviewers with new knowledge , challenges assumptions , and leads to new questions . 
data available today was unavailable in the mid - 1980 s when the FDA and our Bureau of Veterinary Drugs made their determinations on safety . 
to cite one example , for most of this decade , one issue surrounding rBST has been its ability to increase the level of another growth factor in milk . 
drug manufacturers ' studies in the late 1980 s showed that the milk from cows given rBST contained higher levels of insulin - like growth factor , or IGF - 1 . 
this growth factor found in parts per million in human milk and in cows milk is identical . 
the question was whether increasing exposure from this growth factor posed a health risk . 
in 1990 the answer was quite definite that it did not . 
the judgment was based on the science of the day , which suggested that IGF - 1 was not , as we say , " orally active . " 
test animals fed high doses of IGF - 1 showed little response . 
the assumption was made that IGF - 1 did not survive digestion in the stomach . 
it was not until 1995 , a year after FDA ' s commercial registration of rBST , that further studies suggested that IGF - 1 associated with its binding proteins are resistant to stomach acids and that other components of milk , chiefly casein , protected IGF - 1 from digestion , allowing it to be absorbed in the blood stream and to reach the intestine . 
now the scientific debate has turned to whether exposing the general population to a very small daily increase in levels of IGF - 1 poses a problem . 
the concern is that IGF - 1 is a potent promoter of cell division . 
five years after the U.S. National Institutes of Health held its conference on rBST , it held another on the role the IGF system plays in the development and spread of cancer . 
it concluded that , " it has become apparent over the past few years that IGFs are important mitogens in many types of malignancies . " 
in other words , it does promote cancer . 
it went on to say , " Although these conclusions were initially derived from in vitro studies , IGFs may enhance in vivo tumour cell formation , growth and even promote metastasis . " 
a few scientists are calling into question whether very small increases in IGF - 1 in milk might have an effect on cancer rates , particularly cancers of the gastrointestinal tract , breast and prostate . 
in February , FAO / WHO , the joint expert committee , rendered its judgment based on the evidence presented to it . 
the committee concluded that tumour growth will not increase when milk from rBST - treated cows is consumed . 
however , it is interesting to note that , even as the committee was reviewing its evidence , a team of researchers from Harvard and McGill universities published their data in Science suggesting that men whose blood contained high levels of IGF - 1 were four times more likely to develop prostate cancer than men with the lowest levels of IGF . 
the " high level " mark coincided with levels described by the joint expert committee as being within the normal range . 
the questions then become : 
what is the source of IGF - 1 levels ; and , does a very small dietary increase of IGF - 1 intake pose a health risk for some individuals ? 
it is the job of medical science to continually ask questions and to investigate , leading to knowledge which , over time , alters assumptions and conclusions . 
it is the job of reviewers at Health Canada , like those at the U.S. FDA , the U.S. NIH and the World Health Organization joint expert committee , to come to their conclusions based on the best evidence of the day . 
it is our job as parliamentarians who are concerned about public health to ensure that nothing stands in the way of reviewers obtaining the evidence they believe they need to make their assessment . 
in conclusion , I would say that we have a safe milk supply . 
no one suggests that rBST will improve milk quality . 
the motion reminds our regulators to be very diligent . 
it asks that we do no harm to our milk supply as such , and I believe it deserves all of our support . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , May 6 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 58 
Wednesday , May 6 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
visitors in the Gallery 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
incidents at Bakovici Mental Hospital in Bosnia - Investigation Conducted by Regiment ' s Own Officers - Government Position 
industry 
difficulties with InterProvincial Trade Agreement - Effect on Investment and Job Creation - Government Position 
difficulties with InterProvincial Trade Agreement - Failure to Reach Agreement on Energy - Government Position 
national Defence 
solicitation by Canadian Forces Personnel Support Agency - Government Position 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
post - Secondary Education 
millennium Scholarships - Restriction on Funds for Students Studying Abroad - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
canada Evidence Act 
criminal Code 
Canadian Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Amendments from Commons Adopted 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
eighteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
veterans Health Care Services 
interim Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Adopted 
interprovincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Concluded 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
inquiry - Debate Concluded 
west Coast Fisheries 
effect of Federal Policies on Coastal Communities - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
Canadian Forces Day 
proclamation of Day of Recognition - Motion Adopted 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , May 6 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Acting Speaker , Eymard G . Corbin , in the Chair . 
prayers . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of six parliamentary officials from Commonwealth countries who are in Ottawa as participants in the Parliamentary Cooperation Seminar . 
welcome to the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
incidents at Bakovici Mental Hospital in Bosnia - Investigation Conducted by Regiment ' s Own Officers - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate is about alleged incidents at the mental hospital at Bakovici , Bosnia , in 1994 . 
in July , 1996 , General Baril , as head of the army , announced an investigation into misconduct at the mental hospital at Bakovici . 
he promised to personally root out the problems and that the " investigation would be clean , fair and just . " 
the regiment being investigated was the Royal 22 nd . 
general Baril is a member of that regiment , as is the Vice - Chief of the Defence Staff , Lieutenant - General Roy , and Brigadier - General Couture who headed the investigation . 
their board of inquiry blamed the one officer not connected with the Royal 22 nd , Lieutenant - Colonel Moore , the same officer who persisted for two years that an investigation should be held into the activities of the 22 nd at Bakovici . 
is this merely a coincidence , or is it a form of cover - up to protect the Royal 22 nd ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure it is not a cover - up . 
i will attempt to determine whether it is a coincidence and , in that regard , I will seek further information from the appropriate authorities . 
senator Oliver : 
last month , a Special Career Review Board totally exonerated Lieutenant - Colonel Moore . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate agree that those in authority demonstrated poor judgment by having officers of the 22 nd lead the investigation of their own regiment ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I would not want to reach any conclusion on that personally because the Royal 22 nd as my honourable friend knows , has an historic and admirable reputation in this country and abroad . 
at the same time , my friend has raised a legitimate concern , and I would be happy to seek further information . 
industry 
difficulties with InterProvincial Trade Agreement - Effect on Investment and Job Creation - Government Position 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
on February 18 , of this year , The Globe and Mail reported that the Minister for Industry and the Minister for International Trade publicly disagreed on how to resolve the problems associated with the agreement on internal trade that the Prime Minister had signed almost four years ago . 
i may say , to this day , it is in an awful mess and remains unresolved . 
the Minister of International Trade suggested that the federal government should use its constitutional powers to break the logjam , but the Minister of Industry has publicly disagreed with this position . 
the meagre results of the Minister of Industry ' s meeting with his provincial counterparts at the end of February demonstrate that his consensus approach is ineffective , and hurting investment and job creation here in Canada . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate ask the Prime Minister to resolve this public cabinet dispute and clearly state whether he agrees with his International Trade minister that the time has come for the Government of Canada to exercise its constitutional responsibilities and show some leadership on the interprovincial trade matter ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I believe that the Government of Canada has shown leadership with respect to the interprovincial trade matter . 
i do not recall the specific article to which my honourable friend refers . 
if he is talking about hurting job creation , obviously that is not the case , because job creation is on the upswing and unemployment figures are on the downswing . 
senator Kelleher : 
may I suggest to the honourable leader that the upswing in jobs would be higher and the downswing of unemployment figures would be more dramatic if we could resolve this dispute ? 
difficulties with InterProvincial Trade Agreement - Failure to Reach Agreement on Energy - Government Position 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
i would also draw the leader ' s attention to the interprovincial trade agreement . 
when it was signed on July 18 , 1994 , under article 1811 of the agreement , the parties agreed to conclude negotiations on the energy chapter by June 30 , 1995 at the latest . 
i would ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate to consult with the Prime Minister and ask his advice as to why his government has failed to respect this deadline , and when Canadians can expect to see the benefits flowing from the freer interprovincial trade in energy that he promised us back in 1994 . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i would be pleased to bring the concerns of my honourable friend to the attention of my colleagues , and indeed to that of the Prime Minister . 
i do not know how adversely interprovincial trade is being affected , particularly in relation to the chapter to which Senator Kelleher refers as the " energy chapter , " but I would be happy to review the situation and bring forward some more information . 
national Defence 
solicitation by Canadian Forces Personnel Support Agency - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate on military matters . 
recently , there has come to my attention the existence of the Canadian Forces Personnel Support Agency . 
this agency is now writing to Canadian business groups and corporations , soliciting contributions . 
a donation of $ 7,000 would allow your company to become a major sponsor in a Canadian Forces support program ; $ 5,000 , an official sponsor ; $ 3,000 , an official supplier ; Canadian Forces photographic contest , $ 5,000 . 
perhaps that gets you a picture of Minister Eggleton on a tote bag or something . 
the announcement tells us that there is a benefit package enclosed . 
to sponsor the Canadian Forces Annual Military Family Calendar costs $ 3,000 , and for Canadian Forces entertainment show tours , $ 25,000 . 
i suppose that would be offshore , overseas . 
to sponsor the Canadian Forces Perspective magazine , $ 1,000 ; for a full - page ad , $ 500 , and on it goes . 
we learn , at virtually the same time , that the soup kitchens for the Canadian Armed Forces - a shame and a disgrace to this nation - are depleted . 
can the minister tell us whether the Department of National Defence is in such tight financial straits that they must resort to these tactics , as opposed to coming clean with the Canadian people by saying that they need some money , and putting forward a supplementary budget ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am wondering what kind of contribution it would take to get the official insignia that my honourable friend has promised , which would designate me as a full - fledged petty officer ? 
seriously , I am not aware of the subject to which my honourable friend refers . 
i would need to seek more information for him on that . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on March 25 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator Ethel Cochrane regarding millennium scholarships and restrictions on funds for students studying abroad . 
post - Secondary Education 
millennium Scholarships - Restriction on Funds for Students Studying Abroad - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Ethel Cochrane on March 25 , 1998 ) 
the Government of Canada is committed to providing Canadians with access to education and access to knowledge . 
such access is imperative in order to succeed in the modern economy of the 21 st century . 
the Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation is the Government of Canada ' s way of celebrating the millennium . 
rather than commemorating this thousand - year event by building monuments of bricks and mortar , we decided to invest in Canadians . 
as the 1998 Budget documents noted , the Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation " will help recipients to study away from home , particularly outside their province , and support terms of study in other countries . " 
bill C - 36 , the Budget Implementation Act , 1998 , reflects this commitment . 
part 1 of the Bill would allow the Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation to provide scholarships to students pursuing a portion of their program of studies outside of Canada , provided that they are enrolled at an eligible educational institution in Canada . 
it would not be possible for the Foundation to award a scholarship to a person enrolled only at an educational institution abroad . 
however , the Foundation would provide scholarships to students who are studying outside of Canada as part of their Canadian program of studies while enrolled at an eligible Canadian institution . 
in addition , the Canada Student Loans Program allows students to study at thousands of designated post - secondary educational institutions in the United States and around the world as well as in Canada . 
the Program for North American Mobility in Higher Education and the Canada - European Community Program for Cooperation in Higher Education and Training support the development of student - centred innovative projects to be carried out by multilateral groupings of universities , colleges and technical institutions across North America , and between Canada and the European Community . 
these projects strengthen cooperation in post - secondary education , training and internship , and increase student mobility at the undergraduate and graduate levels . 
orders OF THE DAY 
canada Evidence Act 
criminal Code 
Canadian Human Rights Act 
bill to Amend - Amendments from Commons Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of amendments by the House of Commons to Bill S - 5 , to amend the Canada Evidence Act and the Criminal Code in respect of persons with disabilities , to amend the Canadian Human Rights Act in respect of persons with disabilities and other matters and to make consequential amendments to other Acts : 
clause 2 
replace lines 8 to 12 on page 3 with the following : 
" dependency and who , for a sexual purpose , counsels or incites that person to touch , without that person ' s consent , his or her own body , the body of the person who so counsels or incites , or the body of any other person , directly or indirectly , with a part of the body or with an object , " 
replace line 12 on page 4 with the following : 
" ( c ) the accused counsels or incites " 
clause 16 
replace , in the English version , line 40 on page 9 with the following : 
" objectives the program , plan or arrange - " 
clause 20 
replace lines 11 and 12 on page 11 with the following : 
" ( 2 ) Subsections 27 ( 2 ) to ( 4 ) of Act are replaced by the following : 
( 2 ) The Commission may , on application or on its own initiative , by order , issue a guideline setting out the extent to which and the manner in which , in the opinion of the Commission , any provision of this Act applies in a class of cases described in the guideline . " 
add after line 19 on page 11 the following : 
" ( 4 ) Each guideline issued under subsection ( 2 ) shall be published in Part II of the Canada Gazette . " 
clause 23 
replace , in the English version , line 47 on page 11 with the following : 
" request the Chairperson of the Tribunal to " 
clause 27 
replace lines 11 to 18 on page 13 with the following : 
" ( 3 ) The Chairperson and Vice - chairperson must be members in good standing of the bar of a province or the Chambre des notaires du Qu é bec for at least ten years and at least two of the other members of the Tribunal must be members in good standing of the bar of a province or the Chambre des notaires du Qu é bec . " 
clause 39 
add after line 4 on page 28 the following : 
" ( 4.1 ) 
honourable senators , it is my pleasure to speak to the amendments to Bill S - 5 made in the other place . 
the bill would amend the Criminal Code , the Canada Evidence Act and the Canadian Human Rights Act , and is intended to promote equality of persons with disabilities , as well as other individuals and groups . 
senators may recall that this bill originated in the Senate with first reading on October 9 , 1997 . 
after extensive hearings in the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , it was reported back with one amendment on December 4 , 1997 . 
thereafter , the bill was passed on third reading . 
i believe these amendments also enhance the bill . 
i would like to take a moment to go over the changes made in the other place , bearing in mind the overall thrust of the bill to improve the quality of access for persons with disabilities and other individuals and groups . 
dealing with the Criminal Code and the Canada Evidence Act , two amendments have been made to the part of the bill relating to the Criminal Code . 
the first amendment would improve the wording of the provision creating a Criminal Code offence of sexual exploitation of persons with disabilities who are vulnerable because they depend on a caregiver . 
the purpose of the new provision is to ensure that persons with disabilities will not be sexually exploited , while allowing them , of course , to consent to sexual activities if they so desire . 
the wording has been amended to convey more clearly the fact that , for an offence to be committed , there must be some urging on the part of the person in the position of trust or authority to do something to which the person with the disability would not consent , and not just mere asking . 
a second amendment to this section makes it more clear that it is the touching urged by the person in the position of trust that must be without the actual consent of the disabled person , and not the counselling or inciting . 
honourable senators , I believe that these amendments have improved this provision . 
dealing with the amendments to the Canadian Human Rights Act , some modest changes have been made to the part of the bill that amends the Canadian Human Rights Act . 
first , an amendment was added in respect of the Employment Equity Review Tribunals under the Employment Equity Act to provide for tribunal members to complete cases if their membership on the tribunal expires before they have completed a case . 
bill S - 5 originally provided this only for the Human Rights Tribunal members . 
it is now extended to Employment Equity Review Tribunal members . 
the amendment which has been added would ensure that members of the Employment Equity Review Tribunal would have the ability to complete cases which they have started to hear should their membership expire . 
the second change relates to the guideline - making power of the Canadian Human Rights Commission . 
the amendment would remove the power of the commission to make guidelines in particular cases . 
the existing law allows the commission to make guidelines in respect of " a particular case " and " a class of cases " which are binding on the commission and human rights tribunals . 
however , the Canadian Human Rights Commission has never made guidelines applicable to a particular case . 
its guidelines have always been of general application , applicable to a class of cases . 
it is preferable that the commission continue to focus on general guidelines leaving particular cases to be dealt with through the complaint process established for that purpose . 
i would add that , if the amendments are to this bill , the new tribunal will operate in conformity with legal principles of impartiality . 
the last modest amendment made to Bill S - 5 simply ensures that a consistent approach is taken on the amount of legal experience required for the legal members of the tribunal . 
from the beginning , the chairperson and vice - chairperson have been required to have at least 10 years at the bar or as a member of the Chambre des notaires du Qu é bec . 
the amendment will make it clear that the other legal members do not have to meet such a minimum . 
this will continue to ensure some degree of legal representation on the tribunal to enhance its ability to deal with the increasing number of complex legal issues , including issues of evidence and procedure , while adding to the pool of candidates with legal experience . 
i welcome the changes made in the other place , together with the changes that we have made in this chamber . 
i believe that we have a better bill to promote equality of access for persons with disabilities to the criminal justice system , to the federal workplace , and to federally regulated goods and services . 
this bill is evidence of the ability of both chambers of Parliament to work together to produce worthwhile legislation . 
i strongly recommend that honourable senators concur in the amendments made to Bill S - 5 in the other place . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to lend my support to the amendments that have been proposed in the other place which Senator Lewis has explained to us . 
the amendments that speak to the Criminal Code are precise and particular . 
the amendments which the House of Commons has made to those provisions of the Human Rights Act are good amendments . 
honourable senators , you may recall that this bill is a government bill which was initiated in the Senate . 
following second reading in this chamber it was examined by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
when Bill S - 5 was examined by that committee , evidence was heard from a number of witnesses and the committee recommended that a very important amendment be made to the bill as drafted by the government . 
the Minister of Justice appeared before the committee and the amendment proposed in the Senate committee was agreed to . 
that amendment addressed the prohibited grounds of discrimination being uniform throughout various provisions of the legislation . 
heretofore , the affirmative action provisions of the Human Rights Act did not apply to areas of positive remedy where the prohibited ground of discrimination was sexual orientation . 
the amendment corrected that . 
it was part of the undertaking made a year or so ago when we were dealing with the Human Rights Act . 
that amendment was reported back to this house by our Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee and the government bill , as amended , was given third reading by the Senate and sent to the other place . 
the improvement made to the legislation by this chamber has been embraced by the members of the other place . 
this is an example of this chamber being able to improve upon draft legislation which was initiated by the government . 
it is a very good case study of why it is a useful practice , which enhances the quality of legislation , for the government to introduce as many bills as it deems appropriate in this chamber , so that the legislative agenda can be expedited . 
with those remarks , honourable senators , I endorse the comments made by Senator Lewis . 
speaking for this side , we would support the bill as amended by the other place . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , this is clearly an excellent example of an instance where the Senate has a worthwhile role to play . 
i wish to subscribe to what has been said , and to thank Senator Lewis for his speech and explanations . 
the Senate need not have any hesitation . 
we need not be intimidated or shy because some people in the other place do not want us to exist . 
other projects discussed across Canada are a direct outcome of the Senate ' s desire not to pass a bill on divorce . 
look at what is being done at the present time . 
it is a direct outcome of the Senate ' s wish to intervene on this important issue . 
remember what we did in amending clause 17 in the Constitution to reform the Newfoundland school system . 
the Senate prevailed over the House of Commons to at least give the people of Newfoundland the chance to express themselves . 
when the issue of Quebec ' s linguistic school boards came up , the government immediately made use of the precedent we had set in Newfoundland to hold hearings , which had not been the case with Newfoundland . 
i might add , with the utmost humility , if my suggestion of last week on the controversial matter of hepatitis C had been picked up on , we would not be having these problems in Canada . 
if the Senate had picked up on certain suggestions by senators , for instance to strike a joint parliamentary committee to study any agreement between the federal government and all the provinces , this project would not have died . 
we are all people of experience here , more reserved and less excitable than the House of Commons , perhaps less partisan too , I hope . 
we could have immediately seized this opportunity and shown Canadians that the Senate has a role to play until Canadians decide otherwise . 
i hope that honourable senators will not back off from taking the initiative . 
when we feel that something is good and should be done , we should not hesitate for one minute to take the initiative because a lot of experience resides in this place . 
i will not repeat the speech I once made in reply to a member of the House of Commons , other than to say that the position taken was that senators could not even be elected as dog catchers . 
i found out that over 50 per cent of senators once served in their province at the provincial level , at the federal level or at the cabinet level . 
i am looking at Senator Cohen , and I could mention others . 
man for man , woman for woman , we are way ahead of the House of Commons . 
why should we hesitate to say it ? 
why should we duck ? 
why should we be afraid to stand up at this time ? 
we have to take the initiative . 
motion agreed to . 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the sixth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications ( Bill S - 2 , to amend the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act , with amendments and observations ) presented in the Senate on April 2 , 1998 . 
these changes are proposed in the light of the experience acquired by the board during its seven years of existence , and reflect suggestions made by the interested parties . 
many of the amendments proposed are administrative in nature . 
there are also proposals for improving the operations and independence of the Transportation Safety Board . 
the administrative proposals in Bill S - 2 are intended , among other things , to correct certain definitions in the legislation and to clarify the provisions regarding pipeline occurrences . 
the bill was reported with three amendments : 
the first amendment was made to reassure the interested parties that at least three members would be full time and achieve , at the same time , the purpose of having part - time members , which was impossible under the act . 
the second amendment was made to give air traffic control facilities the same protection of on - board recording that already exists on the flight deck of an aircraft , bridge or control room of a ship , cab of a locomotive , and control room or pumping station of a pipeline . 
this protection is there so that , when the board conducts investigations , it will have the advantage of a high degree of cooperation from those involved . 
they use recordings that are monitoring these facilities constantly , and the information gathered by the TSB cannot be used against any persons . 
in the light of the testimony heard , the committee also felt it necessary to make observations that we hope will be heard . 
during his study of the bill , Mr. Jim Hall , who is Chairman of the United States National Transportation Safety Board , appeared before the committee and , among other things , informed the committee of one of the shortcomings they faced during his mandate , namely the lack of coordination and support for the families when there is an aviation disaster . 
congress responded by passing legislation in 1996 , the Aviation Disaster Family Assistance Act , and giving their board the responsibility to address the needs of families of passengers involved in aircraft accidents . 
your committee feels that the situation in Canada should be evaluated and that the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board should look into the shortcomings , including the consultation and support services made available to relatives and friends of Canadians killed in air accidents , in order to determine the corrective action required . 
honourable senators , I wish to say that Canada has an outstanding reputation in the field of safety investigation , and that the board is an important and critical part of our transportation safety culture . 
as well , I wish to thank members of the committee for the work done on this bill . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I thank the Honourable Senator Bacon for her remarks on the report . 
parliament had several objectives in mind when it approved the legislation that Bill S - 2 will amend . 
first , it wanted to restore public confidence in the safety of Canada ' s transportation system . 
some very tragic and memorable accidents had damaged that confidence - the 1985 crash of a DC - 8 aircraft in Gander , Newfoundland , that claimed the lives of 256 people ; the 1986 train disaster in Hinton , Alberta ; the 1989 air crash in Dryden , Ontario . 
these and several other accidents affirmed the need to improve our system of accident investigation and safety review . 
second , Parliament wanted to put in place something that transportation safety experts had wanted for decades . 
a 1972 report on the state of Canadian accident investigation saw the need for an independent board - a board that would be independent of government regulators , and a board that would investigate all modes of transportation . 
the United States made that separation between transportation regulator and transportation safety reviewer in 1974 when it created its National Transportation Safety Board . 
in 1989 , the Progressive Conservative government gave us the Canadian Accident Investigation and Safety Board , otherwise known as CTAISB . 
at that time , Ross Belsher , then secretary to the Minister of Transport , said very clearly why we needed an independent agency : 
can we expect those who write and enforce regulations to conclude from an accident that they blew it , that the regulations they wrote are wrong or at least inefficient or that they did not enforce them properly ? 
in such situations , some will of course rise to the occasion and admit mistakes . 
however , human nature being what it is , there is a clear potential at least for conflict of interest when the regulators of safety are also the accident investigators . 
as the law creating the board wended its way through Parliament , some government members saw that it had a huge gap . 
the original act did give us an independent agency to investigate air , marine , rail and pipeline accidents , but it failed to give CTAISB the power or the funds to investigate the vast majority of commercial accidents . 
the original act also required a three - year review of the law . 
here are some of the commissioner ' s observations : 
while trucks are involved in only 4 per cent of highway accidents , these accidents account for 42 per cent of the highway deaths . 
canada - wide , the statistical information on the causes and circumstances of highway deaths is fragmented and uncoordinated . 
while Transport Canada , the regulator , and the National Research Council have done extensive works on highway safety , the review report said , " it is now time to make that role much more visible and to add the resources of the accident investigation and safety review board . " 
these same commissioners said that " The human and economic costs of not having facts to learn useful highway safety lessons is simply unacceptable . " 
they recommended that the government bring in amendments defining extra - provincial motor vehicle accidents and giving CTAISB the authority to investigate them . 
the government ' s response , a full year and a half later , was that it would give the recommendation a " thorough review . " 
it said amendments might be considered when the act was reopened . 
bill S - 2 reopens the original legislation , but it does not have the recommendations on highway safety . 
i had asked for details of the " thorough review " which the government promised , and in February received some information . 
i was informed that the review was internal , and essentially comprised an overview of current collision data collection and accident investigation . 
i was told that in October 1996 , a council of federal and provincial ministers of transport had declared that " Canada ' s vision will be to have the safest roads in the world by 2001 . " 
those are fine words , but we all know the difference between a mission statement and actually getting there . 
the facts speak for themselves . 
the facts are that deaths and injuries resulting from accidents involving large trucks outnumber those tragic human costs from accidents involving all other commercial modes of transportation combined . 
last fall , our Senate committee was presented with the reality : 
in one year alone , deaths from air , rail , ship and pipeline accidents totalled 271 . 
deaths from big trucks were more than double that number , standing at 578 . 
injuries from accidents involving airplanes , trains , ships or pipelines totalled 265 ; injuries from highway accidents involving large trucks were almost six times as numerous . 
another report gave us a different perspective . 
a study by Transport Concepts found that when it looked at the death - toll from hauling freight across this country , expressed in billions of tonnes per kilometre , more than seven people died from trucking accidents for every death by rail transport . 
when common sense is applied to those facts , common sense dictates that federal investigators must have the authority to investigate truck accidents and make recommendations on ways to reduce them . 
in committee hearings on Bill S - 2 , we heard from officials of the U.S. counterpart agency , the National Transportation Safety Board . 
we heard that they do take the common sense approach . 
we heard that the agency is very active in the highway field because that is where most of the fatalities are , more than 90 per cent of them . 
Mr. Barry Sweedler , of the agency ' s office of safety recommendations and accomplishments , said : 
we feel we can have a great impact on the highways , and we have ... had an impact ... through our very tailored accident investigation . 
i am not suggesting that this board should investigate every trucking accident on the highways . 
as the U.S. agency does , it could be selective . 
it could launch an investigation when it believes that there are lessons to be learned to prevent future deaths . 
when our committee reported this bill , it made the following observation , as you have heard : 
the Committee feels that the expertise of the Board could be valuable on major highway accidents . 
the committee recommended that the board look at ways of cooperating with other federal and provincial agencies and deciding whether it could play a greater role in investigating serious highway accidents . 
some very interested parties to this bill , including the executive director of CTAISB , believe that Bill S - 2 is opening the door very slowly to giving the safety board the power it needs . 
they believe that clause 11 will allow the board to make agreements with provinces to investigate accidents on highways if the province is willing to pay the cost . 
i find that puzzling on two counts : 
first , clause 11 refers quite specifically to transportation matters " within the legislative authority of the province . " 
transport Canada tells us that road safety in Canada is a shared responsibility . 
the federal share concerns vehicle safety manufacturing standards under the Motor Vehicle Safety Act , and the safety of extra - provincial commercial carriers under the Motor Vehicle Transport Act . 
it has largely delegated the authority under the MVTA to the provinces and territories . 
under clause 11 , perhaps the federal board could launch an investigation into a trucking accident if asked by a province . 
perhaps it could make recommendations about commercial carriers . 
presumably it could say nothing about truck manufacturing standards , which are within the legislative authority of the federal government . 
in those matters , we would still not have achieved that separation between the regulator , Transport Canada , and the investigator , the safety board . 
my second reason for finding that clause 11 and the committee observations fall short of the mark is that other sections of Bill S - 2 make no mention of extra - provincial motor vehicle accidents . 
they are not included in the definitions of a transportation occurrence , or in the clause regarding the expertise of board members , or in the hiring of directors of investigations . 
if the government does intend to allow the board to launch investigations on behalf of provinces that ask for them , surely we have a duty to make sure that the board can have knowledgeable people to perform the job . 
my amendments , in part , would give the board up - front what it needs if it is to do the job that some suggest the government is leaning towards in clause 11 . The amendments would also go further . 
they would allow the board to recommend improvements on matters still in the hands of Transport Canada . 
they would not require the provinces to pay for an essential part of ensuring safety nationwide . 
honourable senators , I believe that the integrity of our transportation system and the lives of Canadians are much too important to be mired in federal - provincial machinations . 
in closing , I would like to recall something you may have seen on the front page of a section of The Ottawa Citizen earlier this month . 
very fortunately , no one was injured . 
similar accidents in Ontario alone have caused at least four deaths in the last three years . 
i certainly would like to have CTAISB have the power to investigate this sort of repetitive accident if , in its wisdom , it believes that there are lessons to be learned . 
as the law now stands , the board does not have that authority , even when the motor vehicle in question belongs to the federal government . 
i hope honourable senators will agree that these amendments present a common - sense solution to a very real problem and that they will give them their full consideration and support . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
honourable Senator Kinsella ) . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , in speaking to Bill S - 12 to amend the Criminal Code , abuse of process , I think the best way for us to proceed is to refer the bill to committee . 
i would recommend that we refer the bill to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
eighteenth Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the eighteenth report of the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( budgets of certain committees ) , presented in the Senate on May 5 , 1998 . 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , may I be permitted to ask a brief question of the chairman of the committee on the report ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Forrestall : 
summer is fast approaching . 
the committee considered what is to be done in connection with the paintings above our heads , and I believe the matter is dealt with in the report . 
could the chairman of the committee tell the chamber what the fate of these beautiful paintings is to be ? 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , the paintings are to be restored during a time when the Senate is not sitting . 
it will be done in a way which will involve the members of the public who visit the chamber in light of the fact that this is , indeed , a national treasure and part of our national heritage . 
the pictures require refurbishing , and that will be done this summer . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
veterans Health Care Services 
interim Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fourth report ( Interim ) of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology entitled : " The State of Health Care for War Veterans and Service Men and Women - First Report : 
long - Term Care , Standards of Care and Federal - Provincial Relations , " tabled in the Senate on April 2 , 1998 . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of the report . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
interprovincial Relations 
applicability of Subpoenas Issued in Relation to Commissions of Inquiry - Motion - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Moore , seconded by the Honourable Senator Butts : 
that the Senate urge the governments of the provinces and territories to ensure that their laws respecting the enforcement of interprovincial subpoenas explicitly provide that they are applicable , not only to courts of law , but also to commissions of inquiry ; 
that the Senate also urge the government of any province or territory to amend such laws where they are not clearly applicable to commissions of inquiry in order to remove any doubt ; and 
that a message be sent to the Assemblies of the provincial and territorial legislatures to acquaint them accordingly . - ( 
honourable Senator Watt ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it would be very difficult to grow up in the province of Nova Scotia and be unaware of the importance of mines . 
it would be impossible to grow up in that province and be unaware of mine disasters . 
my first experience with a mine disaster was when I volunteered during the Spring Hill Mine disasters . 
for those who have lived through such events , the Westray disaster brought back the pain experienced when such an event happens to people in your native province . 
regrettably for these individuals and their families , there has been no closure . 
there has been no closure because , despite the best efforts of those who investigated the disaster and those who conducted an independent study , they were unable to obtain evidence from those who had the greatest knowledge of this event , those who knew whether safety regulations had been sufficiently applied and , if not , why not . 
the reason for the failure to obtain this evidence is that , while provinces recognize subpoenas in matters before courts of law , they do not presently recognize interprovincial subpoenas from inquiries such as the one undertaken in the Westray disaster . 
senator Moore ' s proposal is to ensure that this will not occur in the future . 
he wishes to ensure that the laws of the provinces and territories do respect interprovincial subpoenas to appear before an inquiry of this nature . 
he is urging the provinces and the territories to pass such laws . 
i , too , would urge them to pass such laws , and I urge this chamber to support Senator Moore ' s motion . 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore : 
honourable senators - 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
it is my duty to inform the Senate that if Senator Moore speaks at this time it will have the effect of closing debate on this motion . 
senator Moore : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank those who made interventions on this motion . 
i also wish to thank my honourable colleagues on both sides who have spoken with me privately and offered me their support and encouragement in this matter . 
i believe that this is a most important matter . 
it would be most appropriate if the Senate saw fit to adopt this motion today , being three days before the sixth anniversary of the Westray Mine tragedy . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
sixth Annual Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , Seoul , Korea - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Hays calling the attention of the Senate to the Sixth Annual Meeting of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum , held in Seoul , Republic of Korea , from January 7 to 10 , 1998 . - ( Honourable Senator Oliver ) . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I rise today to respond to the excellent presentation made by Senator Hays on the sixth annual meeting of the Asia - Pacific Parliamentary Forum held in Seoul , Korea , from January 7 to 10 , 1998 . 
in our fast - paced world , much of a conference ' s success can be determined by its timing , by how current are the issues being discussed , and by how relevant are the discussions to both the current and future events . 
we were not disappointed . 
the Canadian delegation arrived in Korea when three major events were occurring : 
first , there was the Asian financial crisis which was causing distress to the economy ; next , there was the possibility of renewed talks between North and South Korea ; and , third , Kim Dae - jung had been elected President of South Korea . 
indeed , those three issues dominated much of the discussion and debate during both the formal and the informal meetings . 
this APPF forum was held at a time when the eyes of all the world were focused on the Asia - Pacific region . 
the APPF conference provided the Canadian delegation with an opportunity to conduct frank and open discussions with our Korean hosts and to share information with 190 representatives from 24 Pacific Rim countries , including the U.S.A. , Russia , China , Japan and Australia . 
Asian - Pacific countries understand that their economic future is interwoven with the success or failure of other countries in the Asia - Pacific region . 
they use conferences such as the APPF to build links between countries , links that they hope will have both economic and political benefits for their citizens . 
for example , in January , the Prime Minister declared 1997 Canada ' s Year of Asia - Pacific . 
later in the year , a Team Canada trade mission toured the region and the Asia - Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum was held in Vancouver . 
the APPF conference in Korea added one more link in Canada ' s ongoing effort to expand our nation ' s contacts throughout the region , both at the parliamentary and the governmental level . 
as the Honourable Sergio Marchi , Minister for International Trade , noted on September 8 , 1997 : 
one of the things we have learned this year is the importance of developing personal relationships . 
fax to fax will never replace face to face . 
Canadians understand and recognize that the Asia - Pacific region is home to the world ' s fastest growing markets , and vital to our trade interests . 
the World Bank estimates that East Asian developing economies need to spend between $ 120 billion and $ 150 billion U.S. between 1995 and the year 2004 on power plants , water systems , telecommunications networks , air and sea ports , highways and other sectors in which Canadian industries are world leaders . 
china , for example , will spend more than $ 32 billion on infrastructure investments in their paper industry over the next 15 years . 
canada is well positioned to participate in this type of investment opportunity . 
we have the skill and the capital . 
through meetings such as the APPF and other regional forums , we are building the necessary contacts . 
canada has already made important economic gains in this region . 
today , Korea is Canada ' s sixth largest trading partner . 
in 1995 , two - way trade reached $ 6 billion . 
the potential of the Korean telecommunications market is currently valued at about $ 4 billion and the agricultural products market at about $ 10 billion . 
it is for these reasons , and the potential that the Korean market holds for Canadian exports , that the Canadian government has pursued aggressively new economic ties and improved relations at both the political and parliamentary level . 
a thorough understanding of the region , its people and its leaders is necessary if we are to enhance understanding of common concerns . 
the APPF meeting allowed for an exchange of ideas on issues relating to peace and security , human rights and legal reform , environmental and social development , and culture and education . 
it also provided delegates an opportunity to meet the new South Korean President Kim Dae - jung , who addressed the conference . 
peace and security issues played a very important role in the conference , especially the relationship between North and South Korea . 
president Kim Dae - jung ' s election has introduced a new and dynamic leader to the political scene . 
in addition , delegates had many opportunities to exchange information and views on the possibility of reconciliation between North and South Korea . 
this discussion was very timely because of speculation that North and South Korea will open negotiations in the near future . 
delegates to the APPF meeting were therefore not surprised to learn that talks of reconciliation began last month in Beijing , China between North and South Korea . 
it was clear from our meeting of parliamentarians that President Kim Dae - jung must not only deal with the internal economic problems of South Korea but he must also be concerned with security issues and the problems within North Korea . 
any sign of political instability in the Korean peninsula and the potential for an outbreak of hostility between North and South Korea places serious constraints on investment and economic growth . 
the previous government in Seoul had begun to break the ice between the two Koreas when they recognized the necessity to offer food and financial assistance to North Korea . 
in 1995 , 150,000 tonnes of rice was sent to North Korea . 
this was followed by an expenditure of $ 2 million on grain and $ 1 million for powdered milk in 1996 . 
in 1997 - 98 , direct government - to - government aid will reach $ 6 million for grain , with a possible additional expenditure of $ 10 million for corn and powdered milk . 
the Beijing talks will break new ground in one of the most long - standing and bitter relationships in the world . 
other discussions at the APPF focused on how to provide further progress in trade and investment liberalization and the stabilization of capital and financial markets . 
much of the discussion focused on issues that were not only global in nature but of high importance to Pacific Rim countries , including the environment , climate change , El Ni ñ o and energy issues . 
additional motions were moved on such dangerous and important issues as drugs , terrorism , money laundering and corruption . 
president Kim Dae - jung was incredibly frank and direct in recognizing the problems that exist in his country . 
he stated that the underlying cause of the crisis lies in the collusive relations between government and business , an economy dictated by bureaucrats , and corruption and malpractice on the part of the Chaibols . 
the 35 Chaibols , which are Korea ' s big business conglomerates , continue to control 60 per cent of Korea ' s economic output . 
president Kim Dae - jung signalled his intention to insist on economic reform , and he has refused to accept recent restructuring plans of the Hyundai group and the LG Group , calling them " cosmetic . " 
the president clearly believes that collusion , corruption , and malpractice are at the heart of Korea ' s economic ills . 
those at the conference had an unparalleled opportunity not only to meet him but to evaluate him . 
one came away with the feeling that the new South Korean president is a remarkable individual who has overcome 30 years of adversity before becoming the president . 
if anyone is able to restore political and economic stability in the Korean peninsula , we hope that it will be President Kim Dae - jung . 
through the APPF , Canada was able to obtain new information on the aims of the Asia - Pacific Rim countries . 
our parliamentary delegates were also able to forge new links which will prove beneficial in the future . 
at the same time , we had the opportunity to hear firsthand from one of the leading political figures in the region . 
i was proud and honoured to be part of the Canadian delegation , and I thank Senator Hays and other members of the delegation and all of our officials for their efforts on behalf of Canada . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
legalization of Industrial Hemp Cultivation 
inquiry - Debate Concluded 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Milne calling the attention of the Senate to the legalization of industrial hemp cultivation ; and to the credit due the Senate for its role in ensuring hemp would be planted in Canada this year . - ( 
honourable Senator DeWare ) . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give credit to Senator Milne for prompting the Senate to give back to Canadian farmers the right to legally grow industrial hemp . 
it was at her initiative a little less than two years ago that we passed an amendment to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act no longer forbidding farmers to produce this very promising crop . 
it was through the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance and Senator Milne ' s skilful prodding that Health Canada officials were persuaded to finish the task by drafting regulations ahead of schedule . 
senator Milne has certainly demonstrated the fine job that members of this chamber can do without a great deal of fanfare . 
she has provided a valuable service to Canadian farmers . 
two years ago , I spoke in support of Senator Milne ' s amendment . 
i recalled that , before 1938 - before Canada followed lockstep behind the U.S. ban on hemp - Canadian farmers did grow hemp crops for industrial use . 
in my home province of Manitoba , hemp was both grown and milled . 
the Manitoba Cordage Company took the hemp that grew on the Prairies and turned it into rope and twine . 
consolidated Growers and Processors , an offshoot of a California firm , has opened a Winnipeg office . 
it is laying plans to import the extremely low - level THC seeds from Europe and to sign contracts with more than 100 farmers in Southern Manitoba who have already expressed interest in growing the industrial variety . 
the company is also looking at building a $ 500,000 processing plant in Portage la Prairie , or Carmen , or Morden . 
it wants to produce insulation and panelling , specialty papers , and health foods . 
further west , West Hemp Enterprises Inc. , a Vancouver - based firm , is helping farmers in B.C. and Alberta to procure licences and seeds . 
in a 100 - kilometer region around Grand Forks B.C. alone , some 75 farmers have expressed an interest in growing this crop . 
in that regard , a recent article in The Financial Post stated : 
hemp is on the cusp of becoming a big business in Canada .... 
north America ' s market for hemp is estimated at US $ 30 million and is growing at a rate of US $ 8 million to US $ 10 million a year . 
the global market is valued at $ 100 million to $ 200 million U.S. Hemp products have graduated from their association with flower power and 1960 s hippies , and are now becoming chic . 
companies like Giorgio Armani , Ralph Lauren and Adidas are using hemp . 
for economic reasons alone , I think we have been very wise in speeding up the process to allow the legal cultivation of industrial hemp in this country while the U.S. still stonewalls its farmers . 
two years ago , in supporting the amendment Senator Milne proposed , I spoke of the almost endless potential uses of hemp . 
its Latin name means , literally , " the useful plant . " 
i will not repeat the long list now , but as someone who is very concerned about what is happening to our forests , I am enthusiastic about the prospect that hemp cultivation could save some of our trees . 
i would also be very pleased if Ontario farmers who now grow tobacco find that hemp is just as profitable and a much more beneficial crop . 
two years ago , I also noted that , if farmers are to realize hemp ' s potential , much more will be needed than the federal government ' s green light . 
nothing flies without good research and development . 
i am pleased that last summer the Ontario government announced plans to spend $ 500,000 on basic hemp research . 
i hope the Government of Canada will also be amenable to giving farmers and entrepreneurs the support they need to make their plans work . 
none of these plans would be achievable without the amendment that originated in this place . 
i congratulate Senator Milne and all the other senators who supported her initiative . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
west Coast Fisheries 
effect of Federal Policies on Coastal Communities - Inquiry - Debate Concluded 
hon. Pat Carney rose pursuant to notice of April 30 , 1998 : 
that she will call the attention of the Senate to the effect of federal policies relating to the West Coast fisheries on coastal communities and on the fishermen themselves . 
in the face of a critical shortage of coho and the threat of a complete shut - down this summer of the Pacific salmon fishery , the federal government is set to announce an aid program for the West Coast which will balance the " son of TAGS " program in the east . 
the program is reported to include a $ 200 - million licence buy - back as well as reciprocity in other program areas . 
this is yet another program designed for the problems of the East Coast . 
we want a West Coast solution . 
we still have fish . 
in spite of the media reports about the coho , the fact is that the other runs , including the sockeye , are expected to be plentiful this year . 
the Pacific salmon fishery is a sunrise industry . 
we do not need buy - back programs that will shut down the small communities and accelerate the collapse of the coast . 
we do need development funds to preserve the habitat and support our natural and human resources . 
in order to work , this program must address and correct three basic issues . 
the first issue is the decimation of the home fleets under the Liberal government ' s Mifflin Plan , which is still in effect despite ruinous results . 
when it was announced in March of 1996 , the main features of this plan were a targeted , 50 - per - cent reduction in the capacity of the commercial salmon fleet , single - gear and area licensing , and licence stacking . 
this forced fishermen to buy additional rights to fish . 
now , in 1998 , the Mifflin Plan has very efficiently concentrated much of B.C. ' s salmon fishing effort in large boats based in urban centres . 
it has brought no conservation benefits , because it has not reduced the fleet ' s capacity to catch fish . 
it has wiped out many of the smaller fishermen and the home fleets , putting people out of work and accelerating the demise of some coastal communities along our 25,000 - kilometre coast . 
the Mifflin Plan has also been implemented in an underhanded and undemocratic fashion , worsening already testy relations between the Department of Fisheries and Oceans and fishermen . 
last fall , DFO authorized a fleet - wide vote on the continuation of licence - stacking . 
the voting instructions included a provision whereby any licence holder who did not vote was considered a vote in favour of licence - stacking . 
honourable senators , this negative - option approach is abhorrent to Canadians , whether it involves cable or fish . 
after their tour of the West Coast communities this winter , members of the House of Commons Fisheries and Oceans Committee recommended in their interim report that the minister immediately ensure that uncast ballots at all future voting are not credited to the results one way or the other , consistent with Canadian election and referendum laws . 
the Mifflin Plan is destroying the infrastructure of small communities along our coast , and its effects must be reversed for any federal aid program to B.C. to truly help in the development and the long - term growth of those affected by this year ' s coho crisis . 
i suggest that you wonder at the fate of those people who mortgaged their homes and went into debt in order to buy rights under the Mifflin Plan only to learn that their boats might be tied up at the dock all summer . 
the second basic issue is that any aid program for the West Coast must take into account the failure to enhance and sustain salmon habitat and stocks which are being adversely affected by poor logging practices and the neglect of the spawning grounds . 
it must also include training funds to train workers to do this important work and add to the skills inventory in the fishing industry . 
we are not talking about transitional funds . 
we are talking about real work for real people . 
this shows that the fishery has to be managed closer to the region . 
personally , I have long advocated joint management of the fishery . 
we accomplished this on the East Coast with the Atlantic Accord in Energy when I was minister . 
that accord established joint management of offshore oil and gas resources through parallel legislation . 
it can also be done in the fishery in British Columbia . 
the dilemma of the coastal communities is illustrated in the fate of the fuel docks . 
when we lose our fish , we lose our fishermen , and when we lose them , we lose the community fuel dock . 
when that goes , so goes the neighbourhood . 
the logging , the various fisheries , including the recreational fishing industry , tourism , are all linked . 
the demise of the fish stocks will have a tremendous impact on the whole coast . 
coast watchers tell me this is already happening in Masset , Alert Bay , Kyuquot and possibly Ucluelet , and other coastal communities which I toured on the West Coast during the Easter break . 
any federal aid package must address this fact . 
Yves Fortier , in his letter of resignation as chief Canadian negotiator for the Pacific Salmon Treaty , wrote : 
as you well know , the principle of equity - with conservation , one of the two fundamental pillars of the Treaty and the primary raison d 'ê tre for its acceptance by Canada - provides that each country shall receive the benefits of the production of salmon in its waters . 
as presented to me at the outset of my mandate it was Canada ' s position that , due to the excessive interceptions of Canadian origin salmon in U.S. fisheries , Canada was being deprived of the benefits of its salmon production . 
Fortier called our position , " ... valid , justified , reasonable and practical . " 
he added : 
in the end Canada ran into the very obstacles that had caused the impasse in the first place : greed and fear . 
greed on the part of the U.S. regional interests who , being in what the MOU refers to as the " advantaged " position , and feeling immune to any meaningful pressure , had little or no incentive to reduce their harvests of Canadian fish . 
fear , on the part of a U.S. federal administration reluctant to exercise the political will necessary to challenge those regional interests so as to satisfy its national obligations toward Canada under the treaty . 
those are strong words from a senior Canadian diplomat . 
... equity must be implemented as a precondition to the negotiation of long - term fishing regimes under the Treaty , and doing so will definitely involve reductions in U.S. interceptions ( though not necessarily to the extent demanded by Canada ) . 
my concern is that Ottawa will fail to hold the line on equity or fair share and will trade off this key demand in return for U.S. concessions on other Canadian interests , because I know it happens . 
i am concerned that Canada will allow the Americans to split the equity or fair share issue off from other treaty issues and deal with it on a stand - alone basis . 
this separate - table approach would doom the Pacific Salmon Treaty , in my view , because my experience as Minister for International Trade responsible for the free trade agreement negotiations with the U.S. showed that the issue on the separate table never gets resolved . 
it is essential that Canada maintain the position that all treaty elements , including equity and conservation , are on the negotiating table , and that all elements are addressed . 
more than our fair share is at stake . 
the separate - table approach would threaten the resource itself because Ottawa would be unlikely to fund new conservation and habitat renewal measures aimed at growing fish if Canada did not reap the economic reward . 
why should Canadian taxpayers grow fish for American fishermen ? 
the cancellation in February by the federal government of the mapping and inventory program fuels our paranoia . 
is it an early warning signal that Ottawa will retreat on equity ? 
my basic principle has always been that the goal of any program should be to use the resources of an area for the economic and social benefit of that area . 
the government ' s West Coast program must sustain and enhance the fisheries and the coastal communities , not destroy them . 
the recently released report of Percival Copes , the West Coast fisheries expert , has outlined the means of going to community - based fishing . 
people will say that this is inefficient , but it is more economical in the long run to use the resources of the region for the social and economic benefit of the small communities because they are the coast ' s lifeline . 
the government must change its whole approach to the West Coast fishery and to the communities which are sustained by them in order to survive . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this inquiry is considered debated . 
Canadian Forces Day 
proclamation of Day of Recognition - Motion Adopted 
hon. Bill Rompkey , pursuant to notice of May 5 , 1998 , moved : 
that , in the opinion of the Senate , the Government , in recognition of the tremendous contribution of the members of the Canadian Forces to the protection of Canadian sovereignty , United Nations peace - keeping missions , the NATO alliance , humanitarian assistance , disaster relief and search and rescue operations , should proclaim June 15 as " Canadian Forces Day . " 
it is most appropriate that this issue be addressed this month as this is the anniversary of the Battle of the Atlantic . 
it was through our engagement at that time that we really matured as a country . 
senator Phillips served in Bomber Command , so he was not part of the Battle of the Atlantic . 
however , he recalls the pictures of those corvettes going up and down in those gigantic waves and wondering , when a corvette went down , whether it would ever come back up again . 
Canadians served in those ships , small and inadequate as they were , and they sailed in convoys from North America to Europe . 
not only did our people serve and lose their lives in the Second World War but , as a founding member of NATO , we served after the Second World War . 
indeed , we are still serving in peace - keeping missions in Bosnia . 
we have been in every peace - keeping mission since 1948 . 
that is indeed a record of achievement of which Canadian can be proud . 
not only have we served abroad , we have served at home . 
they served with distinction . 
if they had not been there to answer the call , who would have done that particular job ? 
they are indispensable . 
i should not forget what is perhaps closest to my own province and that is the search - and - rescue operation . 
if Senator Forrestall were here , he could speak more eloquently on that subject than I can . 
however , those " SAR techs , " as they are called , are the jewel of the Canadian Forces . 
they are eminently well - trained and exhibit a high degree of courage . 
what would we do on any of our three coasts or on the Great Lakes without the search - and - rescue operation ? 
i would conclude by saying that , at a time when national symbols are in danger , at a time when many national institutions are disappearing , at a time when Canadians are searching for reasons to reassert their identity , it seems to me most appropriate to simply set aside one day during the year when the people of Canada recognize both past and present service in the Canadian Forces . 
a similar bill is proceeding through the House of Commons . 
i hope that senators on both sides will concur on this motion and establish June 15 of every year as Canadian Forces Day . 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , it is a privilege and an honour to associate my name with the motion put forth by Senator Rompkey . 
senator Rompkey and I served in the other place and we often worked on issues for the benefit of the country . 
i can think of nothing more appropriate to work on than the recognition of our armed forces . 
the armed forces have gone through some very trying times . 
as a result of these trying times , people have recognized their real value . 
they have not shirked their responsibility , regardless of what they have been confronted with in the nation . 
i will not repeat all of the various campaigns they have served in , from the Great War right through to the peace - keeping missions , and to the assistance they have given during those missions . 
we will never know how many lives they may have saved during these recent disasters that have just taken place in this country . 
i , along with Senator Rompkey , urge all honourable Senators to support June 15 as Canadian Forces Day . 
let us build on this and allow the military to maintain their traditions and help to give us the identity that we search for as Canadians . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I was not expecting this motion to be considered today . 
i could request that debate be adjourned , but that might very well be misinterpreted . 
i well remember the days when I was an officer cadet at university . 
i was a member of the military police in Winnipeg . 
i am sure Senator Carstairs knows what I am talking about . 
these are not the most exciting places in Canada . 
however , that was in the early 1950 s , and I have since recovered . 
i did not speak a word of English and not one of them spoke a word of French . 
however , I trained them - the reverse of what they thought they could do for me . 
i regret two governmental decisions that were taken over the years . 
the first is the disbanding of the Airborne Regiment . 
i believe that could have been done differently . 
you must tackle the bad people inside a regiment ; however , you must have have an understanding of what a regiment means . 
the second decision I regret , is the closing of Coll è ge militaire royal de St - Jean . 
i was not chairman of the Liberal caucus of Quebec then . 
in fact , I was not in the caucus . 
if I had been , I would have fought with all my might to overturn that decision . 
having indicated my two areas of regret , the initiative taken by Senator Rompkey and those who support him , especially Senator St. Germain , is to be commended . 
this excellent initiative will at least boost the morale of our troops . 
if I might take just a moment more , it is not enough to express our appreciation . 
we know that , at the present time , the Canadian Armed Forces are in a state of moroseness . 
honourable senators , we must think of the little people . 
the little people are in a state of moroseness . 
for instance , a nephew of mine was in the Montreal Police Force , as was his wife . 
after 13 years of service , he will receive almost the same salary as a senator . 
i have no objection to that . 
however , when I compare military service to the service of a police officer in any big city in Canada , there is such a discrepancy . 
they see it , they suffer and they are in a bad state . 
i agree with Senator St. Germain when he said that it is not enough to show our appreciation for what the military is doing . 
everyone is happy when the forces are at hand to help when necessary . 
everyone is against the police until they need a police officer . 
i would hope that whoever is in charge of that Senate committee will start paying attention to the morosity in the armed forces at the moment . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 59 
Thursday , May 7 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
canada Lands Surveyors Bill 
first Reading 
recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone 
notice of Motion to Authorize Agriculture and Forestry Committee to Study Effect on Human and Animal Health 
question PERIOD 
health 
cost of Providing Relief for Uncompensated Victims of Hepatitis C - Government Position 
fisheries 
changes in Retraining Guidelines for Unemployed Workers under the Atlantic Groundfish Strategy - Government Position 
health 
compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Method of Arriving at Cost - Request for Tabling of Details 
safety of Blood System in Canada - Use of Independent Laboratory in Assessment of Total Number of Victims of Tainted Blood - Government Position 
review of Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of Offer of Further Federal Funds - Government Position 
review of Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of First Ministers Meeting - Government Position 
compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of Resignation of Minister - Government Position 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV CANADA Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Request for Answer 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Department of Public Works and Government Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
orders OF THE DAY 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - debate adjourned 
security and Intelligence 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Engage Services and to Travel Adopted 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Meet In Camera Adopted 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Debate Continued 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Thursday , May 7 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Acting Speaker , Eymard G . Corbin , in the Chair . 
prayers . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , it is my pleasure this afternoon to welcome some special visitors to our gallery . 
we have with us today civilian and military personnel who laboured tirelessly to provide relief from the ice storm of January 6 , 1998 . The 100 who are with us today are just a few of the thousands of people who helped the victims of the ice storm . 
their visit to Parliament is part of the activities celebrating National Emergency Preparedness Week . 
i am sure I speak for everyone here in paying tribute to your determination , courage and skill . 
you were magnificent . 
congratulations on a job well done . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until next Tuesday , May 12 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
canada Lands Surveyors Bill 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 31 , respecting Canada Lands Surveyors . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , May 12 , 1998 . 
recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone 
notice of Motion to Authorize Agriculture and Forestry Committee to Study Effect on Human and Animal Health 
hon. Eugene Whelan : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , May 12 , 1998 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be authorized to examine and report on the recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone and its effect on the human and animal health safety aspects . 
question PERIOD 
health 
cost of Providing Relief for Uncompensated Victims of Hepatitis C - Government Position 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the Province of Ontario has made it clear that it will support the victims of the hepatitis C tragedy , including taking the federal government to court in order to obtain additional funds for the uncompensated victims . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i find it very difficult , as my honourable friend knows , to answer such a question . 
i am sure he could not answer it himself with all the accountants that he might employ in his own business . 
i suppose we could make an estimate . 
i simply say in response that the ground has shifted , and I understand that a meeting of ministers of health will be held sometime next week . 
senator Di Nino : 
would the minister not agree that these funds would be better spent in support of the victims of this terrible national tragedy ? 
senator Graham : 
the Government of Canada took the lead in bringing the provinces on board in the first instance . 
thereafter , the Government of Canada will respond accordingly once it hears from the provincial ministers of health . 
senator Di Nino : 
we look forward to that response . 
fisheries 
changes in Retraining Guidelines for Unemployed Workers under the Atlantic Groundfish Strategy - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
by February of 1995 , this requirement had been dropped . 
why was this done , and which provincial premiers brought pressure on the federal government to make this change ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as all honourable senators know , the TAGS program was not the success it was hoped to be . 
senator Oliver : 
reports indicate that the cod stocks have not returned . 
this means that the future of an estimated 40,000 workers in Atlantic Canada will depend on an extension of the TAGS program , or a new program . 
will the government provide for , and insist on , retraining for these workers , or what will be the plan this time ? 
senator Graham : 
the various components of the program are now under review by the government , and it will be announced in the near future . 
health 
compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Method of Arriving at Cost - Request for Tabling of Details 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
if such figures are available , honourable senator , and it is appropriate to release them , I would be happy to table the documentation in the Senate . 
safety of Blood System in Canada - Use of Independent Laboratory in Assessment of Total Number of Victims of Tainted Blood - Government Position 
hon. Duncan J . Jessiman : 
honourable senators , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate advise us as to whether the federal government assessed the total number of tainted blood victims by using an independent laboratory or examination board to investigate , and if not , why not ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not know the answer to that question , but I will endeavour to seek an appropriate answer for my honourable friend . 
review of Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of Offer of Further Federal Funds - Government Position 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
is that their intention when they go to the meeting ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as I indicated in my earlier response , I said that the meeting would be held sometime next week . 
i am not sure whether Senator Ghitter knows for a fact that the meeting will be held on Tuesday . 
i have heard other suggestions that it may be held on Wednesday . 
however , as I indicated earlier , the Government of Canada will respond to any initiatives that are taken by individual provinces , or , as is hoped , by the provinces together . 
senator Ghitter : 
it is my understanding that some of the provinces will not go to that meeting unless the federal government discloses , prior to the meeting , that they will be putting some money on the table . 
if that is the case , are you or are you not putting some money on the table before attending that meeting ? 
senator Graham : 
that will be the subject of an ongoing negotiation between the federal and provincial ministers of health . 
senator Ghitter : 
does that mean that the file , then , is not closed , as the Prime Minister stated ; that it has been reopened , and that there is the possibility that the federal government will come forward with more money ? 
senator Graham : 
i would think that that would be the indication at the present time . 
review of Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of First Ministers Meeting - Government Position 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , on this same topic , yesterday afternoon during Oral Question Period in the other chamber , the Prime Minister spoke about a meeting of first ministers . 
was this a slip , or should this business not be sorted out by the various first ministers ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I know that the Prime Minister has been in touch with individual premiers of the provinces . 
i am not aware that a meeting of first ministers is contemplated at the present time . 
certainly , however , there have been discussions , as I indicated earlier , with respect to a meeting between the federal and provincial ministers of health sometime next week . 
senator Nolin : 
you are aware that last week the premier of Ontario all but contradicted his health minister . 
yesterday , the Prime Minister of Canada all but contradicted his health minister . 
is this not starting to look a bit like a game of cat and mouse ? 
why does the Prime Minister of Canada not call his premiers together to sort the matter out , put the necessary money on the table , and stop playing politics with people who deserve nothing but compassion ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , it may come to a point where a first ministers conference would be held . 
that would be something for the Prime Minister and the premiers of each of the provinces to determine . 
as my honourable friends knows , the Prime Minister is due to attend the G - 7 or G - 8 conference in Birmingham , England , which will be held during the course of next week . 
i am sure that all Canadians would want some action to be taken prior to that time . 
that is the reason , at least for the moment , that ministers of health will be engaged in an ongoing conversation , and it is to be hoped that a meeting of all ministers of health will be held sometime next week . 
senator Nolin : 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , as my honourable friend would know , the G - 7 meetings are scheduled well in advance . 
it would be impossible at this time for one of the countries to be absent from the table . 
i know that Senator Nolin will appreciate the fact that Prime Minister Chr é tien brings much wisdom , experience , knowledge and the example of progress in Canada to the table when he meets with other G - 7 prime ministers . 
compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possibility of Resignation of Minister - Government Position 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , considering the fact that Mr. Rock was the minister who bungled the gun control bill , considering that he was the minister who deceived the House of Commons and this chamber with respect to the Pearson airport deal , considering that Mr. Rock was the minister whose actions were totally out of order with respect to the Airbus situation and , now , considering the way he has totally bungled the hepatitis C matter , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate not agree that it is time for the minister to resign and go to the back - benches ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Minister Rock has taken leadership on all of these issues . 
some Hon. Senators : 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , on the particular issue to which Senator Ghitter refers , Minister Rock has conducted himself with honesty , good grace and great dignity . 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV CANADA Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Request for Answer 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , the other day I asked the Leader of the Government in the Senate if he could shed some light on the current negotiation between NAVCAN and their employees , in particular from the point of view of whether it was a question of money that caused some massive rejection of the offer or whether it was a question of safety . 
can the Leader of the Government shed any further light on this situation ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my honourable friend will know that safety is always first for anyone involved in the airline industry . 
as I indicated , I promised to bring forth more information , and I will do so at the first opportunity . 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Department of Public Works and Government Services - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 103 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
orders OF THE DAY 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
this bill will implement tax treaties Canada recently signed with Vietnam , Croatia and Chile . 
canada enters into such agreements for two reasons : to avoid double taxation and prevent tax evasion . 
while the terms of the treaties necessarily vary depending on the country involved , they are in essence similar to those of treaties signed previously by Canada . 
let us take a moment to put this bill into perspective . 
among the consequences of the 1971 reform of the Canadian tax system was an increase in the number of tax treaties signed with other countries , which currently stands at 64 . 
major changes have taken place since 1971 . 
for example , dividends paid to a Canadian corporation by a foreign subsidiary used to be fully tax exempt . 
however , since 1976 , only dividends from foreign subsidiaries actively exploited in countries with which Canada has signed tax treaties are exempt . 
bill S - 16 must be examined in the context of Canada ' s constant efforts to review its conventions . 
tax treaties are very important for our country . 
they are directly linked to international trade and thus have a direct impact on our economic performance as a nation . 
let us not forget that close to 40 per cent of Canada ' s economy depends on exports , foreign trade and direct foreign investment , not to mention the flow of information , capital , technology , royalties , dividends and interests . 
since there is currently no tax treaty with Vietnam , Croatia and Chile , these agreements will undoubtedly help Canadian corporations and individuals doing business or investing in these countries . 
in addition to promoting international trade and investment , these agreements will help give investors and traders an impression of certainty and stability , something which can only improve Canada ' s economic relations with each of these countries . 
let me give you a few examples . 
in discussing the bill in more detail , I will start with the issue of double taxation . 
in a world where people and capital are increasingly mobile , conventions on double taxation are essential to prevent revenues from being taxed twice . 
basically , Canada ' s 64 conventions eliminate double taxation in one of two ways : by dividing exclusive taxation powers between the taxpayer ' s country of residence and the country where the income originated , or , when the income is taxable in both countries , by requiring the country of residence to provide a credit for the tax paid to the country of origin . 
in addition , double taxation conventions usually include measures to encourage an exchange of information between tax officials to prevent tax evasion or avoidance , which is the second aim of the conventions . 
i would now like to talk about source deductions . 
the taxpayer ' s country of residence may deduct taxes at source , but the rate is generally capped at 5 , 10 or 15 per cent for dividends and branch profits and 10 per cent for interest and royalties . 
in some instances , copyright , software , patents and know - how are exempted at source . 
in the case of Vietnam , there will be a reduced rate of 5 per cent on dividends paid to a company holding at least 70 per cent of voting shares , a rate of 10 per cent for a company holding between 25 and 70 per cent of voting shares , and a rate of 15 per cent in other cases . 
in addition , there will be a reduced rate of 5 per cent for branches , 10 per cent for interests and royalties , and 7.5 per cent for technical service honoraria . 
where there is no immediate exemption on copyright , software , patents and know - how , Canadians will automatically benefit from any future exemptions Vietnam may give to other members of the OECD . 
in the case of Croatia , there will be a reduced rate of 5 per cent on dividends if a company has at least 10 per cent of voting shares or 25 per cent of capital stock , and a rate of 15 per cent in other cases . 
as for the agreement with Chile , a reduced rate of 10 per cent will apply to dividends if a corporation holds at least 25 per cent of voting shares , or 15 per cent otherwise . 
the tax rate for subsidiaries will be 10 per cent , and if Chile were to enter into an agreement for a 5 - per - cent rate with another OECD member , that lower rate would apply to Canada automatically . 
there will be a 15 - per - cent rate for interest and royalties , but no exemption with respect to copyrights , computer software , patents or expertise . 
in addition , Bill S - 16 protects Canada ' s right to tax pensions and annuities paid to non - residents . 
under the agreements concluded with Vietnam and Croatia , pensions will be taxable in both countries , but the source country must not tax at more than 15 per cent of the total payment . 
in Vietnam and Croatia , social benefits will be taxable in the country of origin , without restriction . 
according to the taxation agreement between Canada and Chile , pensions and social benefits will be taxed by the paying country . 
as well , the country of origin will retain the right to tax capital gains involving the sale of real property , business assets , stocks in real property corporations , and interest in real estate partnerships and trusts . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , this bill offers some real advantages to Canadians . 
passage of this bill will help solidify Canada ' s international trade and investment position , in an increasingly competitive field , while ensuring that Canadian tax policy remains consistent on the international level . 
the bilateral effect of each of these conventions is that no country should lose revenue . 
the increased trade and investment opportunities for corporations and individual Canadians resulting from these conventions will almost certainly result in gains for taxpayers and for the Canadian government . 
in addition , these conventions will promote better relations with these countries . 
one very important feature is that taxpayers will not be taxed twice on their income . 
conventions such as these form a normal context of international relations in a modern economy and their expansion is part of the ongoing activities of a responsible government . 
this is an important bill , honourable senators , which entails no controversy . 
i wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the excellent work of the departments of finance and international trade , and particularly to their officials for the quality of negotiations , and I hope that these efforts are continuing with other countries . 
i urge you , honourable senators , to pass Bill S - 16 without delay so that Canadians may begin to reap the benefits . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
canada Shipping Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - debate adjourned 
honourable senators , it is with great pleasure that I speak to you today , on the occasion of the second reading in the Senate of Bill C - 15 . 
bill C - 15 is an act to amend the Canada Shipping Act , one of Canada ' s oldest laws , and the very first law regulating safety in the marine sector . 
this bill also contains important amendments stemming from former Bill C - 73 , which died on the Order Paper in the last session . 
it has not been updated since it first came into effect , in 1936 , and it is showing its age . 
the 1936 original version was patterned on the 1896 British Shipping Act . 
this old Canadian law contains such anachronisms as a $ 10 fine for drunkenness and the captain ' s power to auction the personal effects of a deceased seaman . 
needless to say , Canada ' s marine community deserves better . 
the bill is the result of the first of two stages in the urgently needed reform of the Canada Shipping Act . 
the proposed legislation also follows numerous discussions with marine industry stakeholders , who fully support it . 
bill C - 15 will bring about long - awaited and essential changes to the shipping industry . 
the marine sector can only benefit from a modern act . 
canada must preserve its competitive edge on the international market . 
at the same time , our transportation policies must be in line with those of the countries with which we do business or compete . 
this is an important fact which the government must take into account to help the marine industry . 
to achieve these objectives , the government has taken initiatives regarding every mode of transportation , particularly to streamline laws and regulations . 
that is why I am pleased to see that this bill is going ahead . 
it strengthens the government ' s resolve to pursue its reform of the Canada Shipping Act in order to modernize it and to help the industry operate safely . 
the government has included in this first - track reform initiative important provisions of the former bill . 
the other provisions will be incorporated into the second track of the reforms . 
bill C - 73 contained urgent amendments to change the Quebec Harbour Pilots Pension Plan . 
there has been an extensive overhaul of the administration of pension plans in recent years . 
one plan not affected by this overhaul was the pension fund administered by the Corporation of Pilots for and below the harbour of Quebec . 
this initiative will bring some recognition to this plan and improve the protection of rights for members belonging to this plan . 
these changes will make affected pensioners subject to recent legislative initiatives rather than rules which predate Confederation . 
in addition , these changes will improve the corporation ' s ability to manage the pension fund . 
the bill includes a new part outlining for the first time the objectives and framework of the act . 
this addition will provide direction for the remainder of the legislation . 
in addition to the provisions dealing with ship registration and ownership and the other urgent amendments from former Bill C - 73 , Bill C - 15 will form the basis for the long - awaited modernization of this outdated piece of legislation . 
we will achieve our goal of implementing a simpler , modernized act that is more consistent with the federal government ' s regulatory policies and susceptible of contributing to better economic performance in the marine industry . 
the industry supports our shift toward a new legislation , and the government remains true to its commitment to seeing this initiative through , resulting in a new Canada Shipping Act . 
i must tell you that I am very pleased with the favourable reaction to this bill . 
the Standing Committee on Transport of the House of Commons made a few comments which prompted us to make minor changes to the bill . 
honourable senators , it is the vigorous efforts of industry and its examination of Bill C - 15 that made changes to the bill possible . 
the industry ' s participation enabled the government to make changes that improved the bill ' s wording . 
the key changes to Bill C - 15 include the elimination of the new clause that was aimed at amending the regulatory power to issue permits for small vessels . 
the power provided under the Canada Shipping Act will be retained . 
the government will take another look at the existing provisions on licencing . 
the current section will be kept to ensure continued operation of the licencing system , which permits life - saving groups and law enforcement agencies to identify vessels . 
in addition , the industry requested an amendment to clarify the government ' s intent concerning the power to regulate control and management of ballast waters . 
the industry wanted to avoid having all ballast waters treated as pollutants . 
the act provides the power to manage ballast waters and to reduce the introduction of harmful organisms into Canadian waters . 
this further reinforces mechanisms for protecting the environment and implementing legislation on the environment , while reducing the threat associated with harmful aquatic organisms . 
at the request of the Corporation of Lower St. Lawrence Pilots , a technical amendment was also made to the wording , to improve the definition of the word " fund " without changing the original scope of the text . 
throughout the consultation process and the subsequent drafting of the bill , officials from the Department of Transport had extensive discussions with the industry , including shipowners and operators , unions and the legal marine community . 
i want to thank these groups for participating in the reform project , and for their continuous support of the new legislation . 
i am firmly convinced - and you will surely agree - that this new bill is an important step toward modernizing Canada ' s marine legislation . 
i will conclude by asking you to support this bill , so that it is also passed in the Senate as quickly as possible . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Forrestall , debate adjourned . 
security and Intelligence 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Engage Services and to Travel Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the first report of the Special Committee of the Senate on Security and Intelligence ( budget ) , presented in the Senate on May 5 , 1998 . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
report of Special Committee Requesting Authorization to Meet In Camera Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Special Committee of the Senate on Security and Intelligence ( in camera meetings ) , presented in the Senate on May 5 , 1998 . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
national Defence 
motion to Establish Special Committee to Examine Activities of Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator Berntson : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to examine and report on the manner in which the chain of command of the Canadian Forces both in - theatre and at National Defence Headquarters , responded to the operational , disciplinary , decision - making and administrative problems encountered during the Somalia deployment to the extent that these matters have not been examined by the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces to Somalia ; 
that the Committee in examining these issues may call witnesses from whom it believes it may obtain evidence relevant to these matters including but not limited to : 
2 . the then Deputy Minister of National Defence ; 
3 . the then Acting Chief of Staff of the Minister of National Defence ; 
4 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( M. Campbell ) ; 
5 . the then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( J . 
6 . the persons occupying the position of Judge Advocate General during the relevant period ; 
7 . the then Deputy Judge Advocate General ( litigation ) ; and 
8 . the then Chief of Defence Staff and Deputy Chief of Defence Staff . 
that seven Senators , nominated by the Committee of Selection act as members of the Special Committee , and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses under oath , to report from time to time and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to authorize television and radio broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee have the power to engage the services of such counsel and other professional , technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purposes of its examination ; 
that the political parties represented on the Special Committee be granted allocations for expert assistance with the work of the Committee ; 
that it be empowered to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada ; 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the Committee submit its report not later than one year from the date of it being constituted , provided that if the Senate is not sitting , the report will be deemed submitted on the day such report is deposited with the Clerk of the Senate ; and 
that the Special Committee include in its report , its findings and recommendations regarding the structure , functioning and operational effectiveness of National Defence Headquarters , the relationship between the military and civilian components of NDHQ , and the relationship among the Deputy Minister of Defence , the Chief of Defence Staff and the Minister of National Defence , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Forrestall , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin , that the motion be amended by adding in paragraph 2 the following : 
" 9 . the present Minister of National Defence . " . 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , in recent months we have had occasion to hear interventions in this house as to whether it was or was not appropriate to resume an examination of the incidents in Somalia . 
we know that a commission of inquiry had access to 2 million pages of documents over more than 2 years and at a cost of some $ 20 million . 
last spring , during the second session of the 35 th Parliament , a special Senate committee on which I sat met with the intent of asking certain questions concerning the Canadian Airborne Regiment in Somalia . 
at that time , certain members of the special committee refused to continue the inquiry . 
honourable colleagues , we all know that there are times in the affairs of a nation when it is folly to become obsessed with mistakes of the past . 
yet it is prudent to learn from those mistakes and move on to the challenges of the day . 
such is the case with the Somalia incident . 
for over two years , at a cost of approximately $ 20 million , a commission of inquiry had access to some two million pages of documents . 
during that time and in its final report , the commission brought forward evidence which contributed significantly to a better understanding of the problems revealed by the incidents in Somalia . 
members of the Canadian forces were all blanketed with shame and faced finger - pointing during the inquiry . 
they deserve better . 
they are only now starting to get back on their feet . 
in fact , events like the recent ice storm have shown how effective and efficient they can all be when they are asked to help their fellow Canadians at the drop of a hat and in any situation . 
why would my honourable colleagues want to continue to muddy the work and reputation of the Canadian forces by digging up again the unfortunate Somalia events ? 
several extensions were granted to the inquiry . 
no one condones the terrible events that happened in Somalia . 
we were all saddened by their impact . 
quick and decisive action has been taken to implement major reforms at the Department of National Defence . 
indeed , of the commission ' s 160 recommendations , 132 have been accepted in whole or in part . 
of the 28 not accepted , most could be achieved by means other than those recommended . 
the government should be praised for its effectiveness in dealing with the recommendations . 
those who harbour doubts need only consult the Defence Minister ' s Report on the Recommendations of the Somalia Commission of Inquiry and other pertinent information the minister has issued . 
honourable senators , the time has come to move on . 
we have learned the lessons of Somalia . 
it is time to stop damning the military and their families . 
instead , let us look to their accomplishments , for example during the floods in the Saguenay and in Manitoba in 1997 and during the 1998 ice storm , and in other countries like Bosnia and Haiti . 
it is time to call a halt to suspicions , unfair accusations , insinuations and hostilities . 
in fact , a decision given last week completely exonerated one of the members associated with the deployment in Somalia . 
i would also mention that Bill C - 25 is aimed at making profound changes to the National Defence Act . 
my colleagues will be pleased to know that Bill C - 25 aims particularly to amend the Code of Service Discipline , which provides the basis for Canada ' s military justice system . 
the planned amendments will mean greater honesty , fairness and transparency within the system . 
in fact , most of the Somalia commission ' s recommendations concerning military justice are being implemented exactly as proposed or in a way that addresses their underlying concerns . 
steps have already been taken to enhance the independence in the military justice system by establishing the National Investigation Service on September 1 , 1997 , and by organizing the Office of the Chief Military Trial Judge , effective September 27 , 1997 . 
as well , the proposed amendments to the National Defence Act will establish a Director of Military Prosecutions , a Director of Defence Counsel Services , a Military Police Complaints Commission , as well as an annual and public reporting by the Judge Advocate General , the Military Police Complaints Commission and the Canadian Forces Grievance Board . 
i should also add that annual and public reporting will be provided by the Chief of Defence Staff , the Canadian Forces Provost Marshal and Ombudsman , and that will be done without the necessity of amending the National Defence Act . 
i believe that the Canadian Forces and the Department of National Defence have shown that they listened , investigated and acted following the Somalia inquiry recommendations and the response tabled by the minister . 
i think it is very important that high pride and deep respect in our Canadian Forces be restored and conveyed to our children . 
honourable senators , let us ensure that Canadians across the country respect the Canadian Forces and the work they accomplish here and around the globe , as they respected them before the Somalia events occurred . 
let us not raise that red flag again . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , debate adjourned . 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Adjourned 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) , pursuant to notice of May 5 , 1998 , moved : 
that the Senate endorses and supports the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada ; 
that the Senate for humanitarian reasons urges the Government of Canada and the Governments of the Provinces and of the Territories to comply with these findings and recommendations ; and 
honourable senators , I cannot recall any event in recent memory when there has been such an outpouring of disgust and dismay as there has been since the announcement that a federal - provincial agreement to compensate victims of tainted blood who contracted hepatitis C was to be limited to those infected between 1986 and 1990 . 
why there is no compensation for those infected before 1986 has been , and continues to be , the question that preoccupies so many , and to which answers are universally condemned . 
in an extraordinarily detached manner , the Minister of Health , acting more like a self - satisfied lawyer who has settled a case to the advantage of his clients than a minister whose responsibilities , by their very nature , require compassion and understanding , told shocked Canadians , particularly the devastated pre - 1986 victims , in so many words , that the government ' s liability was limited to a period when , according to the minister , testing procedures were available but not authorized . 
for the rest of you , the minister said , " the file is now closed . " 
in other words : " See you in court if you feel badly done by . " 
honourable senators , a file on human tragedy is never closed . 
this is not Airbus or Somalia or Pearson or any other embarrassment that the government clumsily tries to disassociate itself from by closing the file , whatever the cost . 
this is about untold thousands of Canadians who , through human error and negligence which could have been avoided , have had their lives turned into a living hell for themselves and their loved ones . 
Mr. Justice Horace Krever ' s final report of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada lists a number of key mistakes leading to the contamination of the blood supply and identifies those responsible . 
i will summarize them as follows : 
first , the federal government did not properly fulfil its duties as a blood systems regulator , meaning it did not keep a close enough eye on the activities of the Red Cross . 
second , the federal government reacted too slowly to the threat of blood - borne AIDS and mistakenly played down to Canadians the risk of the virus contaminating the blood supply . 
third , the provinces , which funded the Red Cross ' s blood program through the Canadian Blood Committee , did not provide timely and sufficient funds for scientific tests that would have screened out blood contaminated with the AIDS virus and hepatitis C . 
four , the provinces did not do enough to track down infected blood recipients , some of whom were unaware they had AIDS and unknowingly passed it on to their sexual partners . 
five , the Red Cross took inadequate steps to implement a screening program that would have prevented high - risk donors , such as sexually active gay men , from donating their blood . 
six , the Red Cross did not move quickly enough to replace its inventory of contaminated blood products used by haemophiliacs with newer , heat - treated products that were safe . 
none of these conclusions has been seriously challenged by any of the parties involved . 
as for the testing procedures not being available before 1986 , as claimed by the minister , I should like to quote from page 689 of the report which states : 
when the possibility of using surrogate testing for non - A , non - B hepatitis arose in 1981 , the Red Cross ' s blood transfusion service advisory committee decided that no action should be taken until there were Canadian data to justify making a decision . 
it did not , however , recommend that the Red Cross take steps to collect the necessary data . 
the Laboratory Centre for Disease Control , which was represented on the committee , also took no steps to collect the data . 
if this is not clear enough , I will quote from remarks made in the House of Commons on Tuesday , May 5 , 1998 by the member for Macleod , Dr. Grant Hill , who said : 
the minister said so plainly on TV last week that the test was not available in Canada before 1986 . 
what he should have said , and should have added to that , is that the regulators decided not to use that test to screen for hepatitis C in donated blood . 
if he had added that proviso , he would have been on firm ground . 
but to say the test was not available before 1986 , I cannot use the word I would like to use to express how I feel about that , but it was wrong . 
it was available . 
honourable senators , the evidence is clear , and none of the health minister ' s flowery eloquence will successfully alter it . 
perhaps , legally , he is on firmer ground . 
no doubt the testing procedures available before 1986 were not as advanced and precise as those developed since . 
perhaps a court may well be more sympathetic to post - 1986 victims than to pre - 1986 ones . 
all this being true , must government policy on any issue - including untold hardships suffered by thousands of Canadians because of the blundering of governments - always be decided by a Justice Department opinion , a Treasury Board directive and a Finance Department veto ? 
i should like to return to the Krever report , which states in part : 
a system that knows that these consequences will occur and what brings them about has , at the very least , a moral obligation to give some thought to the question of appropriate relief for those affected by the inevitable events . 
there is extensive evidence that tort liability not only fails to deter careless behaviour but too often fails to compensate those who have been injured through no fault of their own . 
in Canada , despite an increase in litigation , only a modest percentage of persons suffering avoidable health care injuries receive compensation . 
the 1990 Report to the Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health of the Federal - Provincial - Territorial Review on Liability and Compensation Issues in Health Care ( the Prichard Report ) estimated " that the percentage receiving compensation is certainly less than 10 per cent of potential viable claims . " 
in 1987 , although $ 200 million were invested in liability insurance , " less than 250 injured patients received compensation of any kind from medical malpractice litigation , whether by way of settlement or trial judgment , anywhere in Canada . " 
some persons received significant sums , while others received much less than their actual financial losses . 
even advocates of the tort system acknowledge that the system is ineffective in ensuring compensation for all who need it . 
however uncertain the results may be , the costs of litigation are unreasonably high . 
delays in legal proceedings are common , and their associated costs are exceptionally high . 
taxpayers shoulder a major portion of that cost , but litigants who are also taxpayers assume a double burden . 
the Ontario Civil Justice Review , a provincial government task force , concluded in its first report in March 1995 that costs to the user of the civil justice system " are considerable , sometimes insurmountable . 
they pose a significant problem in respect of access and the affordability of civil justice . " 
there are those who will accuse us on this side of bringing in this motion to take advantage of the government ' s untenable position to jump on the bandwagon , so to speak . 
this is false . 
in the other place , my caucus colleague the honourable member for Charlotte , Greg Thompson , was among the first to address this matter , and he has not let up since . 
colleagues here will certainly recall the eloquent interventions on the question of compensation by a number of my colleagues , such as Senators Andreychuk and Di Nino , and the numerous interventions by Senator Doyle who , as early as June 1995 , expressed concern over the safety of the blood supply and the status of consumer groups before the Krever commission . 
only two weeks after the report was made public , Senator Doyle had this to say about it : 
the story of the progress of the plague is told in sombre passages through the three volumes , telling how slow this country was in responding to the spread of infections and the callous attitude of health guardians to warnings . 
the evidence points out how we ignored the cautions taken in the United States . 
senator Graham , the Leader of the Government in the Senate , replied on the same day : 
it raised very real and legitimate fears about the safety of the national blood system . 
no one could help but be moved by the plight of those affected , the victims . 
as indicated earlier in this place , when Senator Doyle raised this very important question , the conclusions in Justice Krever ' s report on the federal role in what happened are fully accepted by the Government of Canada . 
we accept those conclusions without reservation . 
we accept them in their entirety . 
one of the conclusions which has been accepted , in Senator Graham ' s own words , without reservation , is the following . 
justice Krever wrote : 
until now , our treatment of the blood - injured has been unequal . 
after years of suffering devastating financial losses , many persons infected with HIV from blood or blood products , or their surviving family members , finally did receive financial assistance . 
other Canadians who have suffered injuries from blood therapy have not received any compensation . 
yet the needs of those who have been harmed are the same , regardless of their cause , and whether or not fault can be proved . 
compensating some needy sufferers and not others cannot , in my opinion , be justified . 
the provinces and territories of Canada should devise statutory no - fault schemes that compensate all blood - injured persons promptly and adequately , so they do not suffer impoverishment or illness without treatment . 
i therefore recommend that , without delay , the provinces and territories devise statutory no - fault schemes for compensating persons who suffer serious adverse consequences as a result of the administration of blood components or blood products . 
the motion before us , honourable senators , is to give support to this recommendation , which was endorsed most forcefully and unequivocally by the Leader of the Government in the Senate only last December . 
when the National Assembly in Quebec voted unanimously to allow compensation regardless of the date of infection , the government ' s reaction was curt , and even rude , as the Assembly felt that the additional costs should be borne by the federal government . 
since then , of course , the Quebec government has agreed to contribute to these costs . 
yet , when Ontario endorsed Quebec ' s position and offered to pay the extra costs , the federal government agreed to reopen the file which it had so crudely closed only a few days before . 
the interpretation that I give to two different reactions to the same proposition is that Ottawa accepts the suggestion as long as it does not need to pay for it exclusively . 
if so , this can only mean that the 1986 cut - off date is more the product of concerns for the country ' s credit rating than for the needs of its affected citizens . 
to those who argue that additional compensation would be too great a strain on the government ' s financial resources , let me remind them that the budget includes an amount of $ 2.5 billion for the establishment of Canada Millennium Scholarships which will begin to be awarded in the year 2000 . 
surely the government could satisfy whatever its share of any additional compensation by making use of funds already set aside , although not needed for two years . 
the arguments in favour of this motion are compelling , as a number of my colleagues will demonstrate during this debate . 
the victims and their families are suffering because of official negligence . 
Canadians overwhelmingly support them . 
we are a country which does not hesitate to come to the aid of those affected by natural disasters , such as floods , ice storms , forest fires and crop failures . 
why , then , must we be so cold - hearted and unfeeling when the disasters are of our own making ? 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , why would the no - fault regime in the health sector apply only to hepatitis C ? Is the government claiming that tests were not available or recognized when the line was being drawn between no - fault and fault ? 
why not also say that , in the case of breast cancer , the examinations done in the 1980 s were not as good as those done today ? 
some people have apparently died as a result . 
i could name many other illnesses . 
should this system apply in all sectors ? 
why , in 1985 , did the Progressive Conservative government not implement the tests that were perhaps available ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton said earlier that doctors back then knew that tests were available and approved by the medical community . 
as parliamentarians debating this important issue , it is easy to hand out money . 
we are well aware that this money comes from Canadian taxpayers . 
we must act responsibly . 
this does not mean that we are not deeply moved and that we do not offer our sympathy to all those who are suffering . 
we are all saddened by this situation . 
we are tackling the issue with a feeling of responsibility towards all Canadian taxpayers . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I do not care which government did or did not engage in neglect . 
the point is that neglect can be shown and proven , and compensation and satisfaction must be given to the victims of that neglect . 
awarding compensation to victims of this particular neglect does not mean that all those who suffer , for whatever reason , from an unfortunate surgical intervention automatically can be eligible for compensation . 
this particular tragedy was caused by horrible neglect , even indifference , by government officials , the Red Cross and others who knew that there were facilities available to improve the system and refused to adopt them , for whatever reason . 
that is the difference from other situations where the patient unintentionally suffers grievous damage , whatever reason . 
in this case , it was done with knowledge . 
it was known that the blood was tainted . 
that is the difference . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Leader of the Opposition ' s recommendation is that we follow the Krever report . 
unfortunately , I do not have the report before me , but the recommendation was that the provinces make restitution , that the provinces should pay . 
he did recommend , as has been mentioned , that the compensation be to everyone , but his recommendation was that the provinces should pay . 
does the honourable senator agree with that ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i quoted from that recommendation , and I can quote it again . 
Mr. Justice Krever does say that the provinces and territories should pay , but the federal government has taken the lead on this . 
they are boasting about taking the lead . 
they are saying , quite rightly , that the provinces and territories at one time did not want to pay , that there was unanimous agreement not to touch it . 
the federal government then decided that , no , that was unfair , and got the provinces and territories together . 
they agreed , reluctantly or not , to a sharing of the cost . 
the federal government drew them into this . 
Mr. Justice Krever said that if you are going to pay , pay them all ; do not discriminate . 
now that the federal government has decided to be a senior partner in the compensation package , it has an obligation , if it wants to be consistent with the report , to reopen the package , get the provinces on side , and apply compensation to all . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , this is a complex subject . 
forgive me if I am not as astute as others as to the allocation of the responsibility in the tainted blood matter . 
however , I have some questions to ask of the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate . 
the senator mentioned a universal program . 
how many people are we talking about ? 
what should the allocation be between those who are affected directly by tainted blood transfusions and those who may suffer from a latent onset of problems but who are not now materially affected ? 
when should the payment be made ? 
how should the payment be divided between the federal and the provincial governments ? 
there is a question of mutual responsibility here , and the allocation of liability is unclear to me . 
perhaps the honourable senator could cite a precedent . 
if there is such a precedent , what would be the consequence of that ? 
senators on both sides wish to have a responsible medicare system , not an untenable , run - away health care system . 
we must balance our compassion on the one hand with some form of accountability and responsibility on the other . 
i have asked a series of questions . 
perhaps the honourable senator cannot respond to them today . 
however , when he rereads them , he may be able to respond at a later date . 
this is of concern to all of us . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i deliberately did not quote any figures related to the number of victims , because I have my doubts about them . 
i read somewhere of some mathematical model which was based on all sorts of assumptions . 
that put forward a figure of 60,000 , with 20,000 within the period in question . 
i do not know the exact figures , but I do know that this affected many people . 
are we creating a precedent with this ? 
surely to God we are not . 
surely to God we will learn from this . 
i cannot believe that the federal and provincial governments would be knowing partners in allowing fellow citizens to be injected with a product which they knew was tainted . 
this is the tragedy . 
the government knew the blood had not been tested . 
they refused to implement testing procedures which were already available . 
surely to God this will not happen again . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , " The file is closed . " 
these words will go down in infamy in the annals of social justice in this country . 
the manner in which the present government has responded to our national tragedy with respect to hepatitis C speaks volumes about this government ' s philosophy as to what governance is about . 
a government that operates from the basis of " managing the dossier , " " massaging the message , " " bringing closure to the issue , " and " closing the file , " is a government which has lost its way , a government that has abandoned the liberal policies of its former leaders who understood and acted on the centrist principles of social justice , compassion , and subsidiarity . 
where , Canadians ask , have the progressives of the party of Laurier , St. Laurent and Pearson gone ? 
where has the virtue of fortitude and backbone gone from a once - principled caucus ? 
how could each and every member of the government caucus in the other place leave their liberal social principles at the door and allow themselves to be whipped into voting against their conscience ? 
honourable senators , governance cannot be allowed to mean " managing the file . " 
Canadians are not items to be placed in a manila folder . 
Canadians are not pieces of paper to be moved from one place to another . 
the needs and crises with which Canadians are challenged from time to time are not confronted on the arbitrary choice of opening a file . 
honourable senators - and Senator Gigant è s will join me in this - Aristotle taught us a great lesson many centuries ago , namely , that people are , by nature , social and political , that we need each other , that we are interdependent . 
the legitimacy of government rests on that very foundation which speaks to the needs of people living in community . 
the role of government is to serve the people . 
it is the role of government to be the vehicle of the community ' s response to the needs of the people as they arise . 
the government ' s role is to be at the service of the people in all seasons . 
therefore , honourable senators , we consider it appropriate and we support the intervention of governments to assist those victimized by disasters such as floods , as we had this year in Manitoba , and to help those victimized by the ice storm in Ontario and Quebec . 
the role of government was played by the progressive governments in helping Canadians infected by other medical disasters such as HIV . 
one might also recall the same model of leadership was demonstrated by the previous government in the matter of the Japanese redress program . 
this is the type of leadership which the present government failed to give in the matter of hepatitis C . 
noteworthy , honourable senators , is the fact that Health Minister Rock had the advantage of the report of an independent Royal Commission and yet he got lost in his lawyer - like file mentality . 
the case was not closed . 
we in this chamber wish to address the recommendations made by Mr. Justice Krever , and the motion of my colleague Senator Lynch - Staunton addressed precisely that . 
yesterday , the federal government was informed of Ontario ' s position about assistance for Ontarians infected with the Hepatitis C virus through the blood system prior to 1986 . 
Ontario is committed to sharing assistance for pre - 1986 victims on the same basis as the existing package for those infected between 1986 and 1990 . 
estimates of health and social assistance costs range from a low of $ 1.6 billion to as high as $ 3.2 billion . 
using the most conservative of these estimates , Ontario ' s offer to share costs on the same basis as the current package would break down as follows nation - wide : 
the federal amount would total $ 1.6 billion and the Province of Ontario ' s cost would be $ 2.2 billion . 
the Premier of Ontario continues : 
while I urge other provincial and territorial leaders to adopt the 1986 - 1990 agreement as the basis for treating pre - 1986 victims , the disparity between the levels of federal and provincial contribution would be pronounced . 
a fair and equitable federal share would be at least equal to the provincial contribution to the costs of health and assistance for these victims - in other words , at least $ 2.2 billion . 
details aside , the issue is not one of dollars but one of compassion and humanity . 
regardless of legal liability , all governments have a moral responsibility to Canadians who placed their faith in the blood system and , through no - fault of their own , became infected . 
prime Minister , pre - 1986 victims should not be forced to wait while officials and politicians at two levels of government wrangle over legalities and technicalities . 
nor should they be left in uncertainty pending the outcome of yet another series of meetings . 
Ontario is committed to treating pre - 1986 victims on the same basis as the 1986 - 1990 victims . 
i urge the federal government to make the same commitment . 
your commitment will allow officials from both our governments to determine not whether but how to get assistance into the hands of Ontario victims as quickly as possible . 
on behalf of victims , their families , and all Canadians who want their governments to do the right thing , I look forward to a prompt federal commitment to assist pre - 1986 victims . 
this will allow officials to work out the details of assistance in a timely manner . 
honourable senators , I endorse the recommendations of the Krever commission . 
in contrast with how this matter has been so poorly managed by the present federal Minister of Health , we think the Premier of Ontario is showing the kind of leadership that has been lacking in this city . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Grafstein : 
it is inappropriate to state that the file is closed when , in fact , it has been reopened . 
as a matter of interest , honourable senators , the file being dealt with this week is a different file . 
according to the Hansard of the other place , the Prime Minister , in response to a question by the leader of the opposition said that there will be a meeting next week and he went on to state : 
they will meet representatives of the people who have been affected . 
they will follow the instructions of the House of Commons . 
i see my honourable colleague nodding in acquiescence . 
however , I wish to ask him a question , responding to his responsibilities as a senator from a region . 
there are other senators from regions and from provinces who , up to this moment , have not changed their position with respect to sharing the responsibilities for pre - 1986 victims who have received tainted blood transfusions . 
senator Gigant è s : 
tainted by the Mulroney system . 
senator Grafstein : 
let me complete my question , please . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
order , please ! 
senator Gigant è s : 
they made the mess , and now they are trying to make out that someone else is guilty . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is such a narrow - minded approach . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I wish to narrow my focus because the honourable senator opposite raises an important issue of national and provincial responsibility . 
the leader on the other side was very careful to indicate that there was joint responsibility and accountability for the problem , and how it should be shared . 
i think he was fair in his comments . 
has the honourable senator made representations to the Province of New Brunswick or to the Province of Saskatchewan ? I look at senators from Saskatchewan , a province which to the best information we have received as of this moment , has refused to share in this new deal proposed by the premier from my province and the premier of Quebec . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank Senator Grafstein for his questions , and the spirit in which the question is raised . 
we need this kind of exchange more often in this chamber . 
we are engaged in a serious debate on a matter of national tragedy . 
the motion by Senator Lynch - Staunton is for this chamber to urge upon the federal Minister of Health and the provincial and territorial Ministers of Health that they undertake activity that will yield the result of responding to this need of Canadians in crisis . 
with the unanimous support of this motion , I think the Senate will be very effective in encouraging our leaders in the provinces that we represent in this chamber , and the government , in light of the debate that has occurred in the other House . 
our objective is to meet the needs of Canadians who are experiencing a disaster of enormous proportions . 
at this time last week , the word we had from debates reported in Hansard from the other place was that the file on the matter had been closed . 
earlier today , I took some comfort in the manner in which the Leader of the Government in the Senate answered questions on this matter . 
honourable senators , we shall vigorously participate in this debate . 
if that contributes to keeping this issue alive and keeping the matter before federal , territorial and provincial governments so that an equitable redress can be found , then we will have done our job . 
however , in reading Hansard from the other place , it was categorically stated that the file was closed . 
if Senator Grafstein is apprehending that the matter has been reopened or reconsidered , then I am hopeful that this motion will be part of the solution . 
senator Grafstein : 
as a final comment , I guess the short answer to my second question is that the honourable senator has not made representations to the Province of New Brunswick . 
i assume my honourable friend is speaking in favour of a universal as opposed to a distorted or asymmetrical system . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , that certainly is my position and the position outlined in the motion advanced by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , May 12 , 1998 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 60 
Tuesday , May 12 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
royal ASSENT 
notice 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
child Poverty in Canada 
Canadian Medical Hall of Fame 
announcement of New Laureates 
foreign Affairs 
Mudslide Tragedy in Southern Italy 
criminal Harassment 
agriculture 
recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone 
Canadian Corps of Commissionaires 
aboriginal Veterans 
visitors in the Gallery 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
postponement of Meeting of committee 
the Senate 
notice of Motion to Permit the Taking of Photographs During Royal Assent Ceremony 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
child Custody and Access 
notice of Inquiry - Participation of Members of House of Commons in Hearings of Committee 
question PERIOD 
health 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial and Territorial Ministers - Possibility of Senate Debate 
national Defence 
requirement for Reserves to Relinquish Medical Benefits on Retirement from Military - Government Position 
reported Lack of Funds for Training of Reserves - Government Position 
limitation on Duration of Training and Cancellation of Yearly Exercise - Government Position 
the Economy 
widening of Gap Between Rich and Poor Families - Effect of Enhanced Child Benefit - Government Position 
indexation Level of National Child Benefit - Government Position 
international Trade 
visit to Italy of Team of Parliamentarians of Italian Origin - Exclusion of Parliamentarians of Other Ethnic Origins - Government Position 
health 
full Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possible Establishment of Joint Committee - Request for Answer 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permits for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa - Request for Answer 
industry 
difficulties with Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Impediment to Job Creation - Government Position 
difficulties with Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Failure to Fulfil Sectoral Agreements - overnment Position 
the Senate 
lack of Availability of Aboriginal Committee Room for Meeting of Aboriginal Peoples Committee - Government Position 
treasury Board 
solicitation of Political Donations from List of Government Grant Applicants - Status of Employee Involved - Sensitivity of Ministerial Staff to Issues - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
second reading 
referred to Committee 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading - Debate Suspended 
royal Assent 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Continued 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permit for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , May 12 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2 p.m. , Acting Speaker Eymard G . Corbin in the Chair . 
prayers . 
notice 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker informed the Senate that the following communication had been received : 
12 May 1998 
sir , 
yours sincerely , 
the Honourable 
the Speaker of the Senate 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
child Poverty in Canada 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I wish to bring to your attention the appalling situation of child poverty in Canada . 
yesterday , the National Council of Welfare released its report , " Poverty Profile 1996 . " 
it was shocking to learn that 1.5 million children in this country are living in poverty , bringing the level of child poverty in Canada to a 17 - year high . 
in total , honourable senators , 5 million Canadians live without an adequate income . 
since then , the federal government has claimed that poverty , especially child poverty , has become a priority . 
yet , the measures they have taken , such as the new Child Benefit , amount to little more than a drop in the bucket . 
although the Minister of Human Resources Development claims that the new benefit is enhanced , it provides only $ 105 per year per child to working poor parents . 
on average , poor parents live about $ 9,000 below the poverty line . 
we can all agree that this will do little to improve their situation . 
in fact , the situation is worsening . 
status of Women Canada reported a few weeks ago that the most significant barrier for poor working parents , adequate affordable child care , has been , " the first victim of Ottawa ' s battle with the deficit and retreat from social programs . " 
once again , the real need of children goes ignored . 
i am troubled by this lack of support because 25 per cent of people working in this country are working poor . 
we must also remember the children of parents who are forced to rely on welfare , because they were completely overlooked in the child benefit overhaul . 
honourable senators , all children in this country equally deserve our help and consideration . 
child poverty advocates report that the current Child Benefit system does not keep pace with the cost of living , and that the dollar value will be significantly eroded over time . 
even with this knowledge , the government voted against an amendment to a motion sponsored by a Progressive Conservative member of Parliament to index fully the benefit . 
however , there is a bright side . 
some 14 government back - benchers voted for the amendment , and some 26 voted in favour of a motion to review the system of indexing . 
this is an unusual and welcome level of support for an opposition initiative . 
political will is needed to address the problem of poverty in Canada . 
we have had a showing of political will at the grass roots by the back - benchers who supported the motion to improve the lives of poor children . 
what we need now , honourable senators , is a similar showing at the higher echelons of government . 
Canadian Medical Hall of Fame 
announcement of New Laureates 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , it was my honour today to participate in the 1998 announcement for this year ' s laureates of the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame . 
as co - chair of the committee , it was a great pleasure to honour this group of outstanding individuals who are the pride of all Canadians and medical professionals alike . 
honourable senators , before proceeding any further , allow me to offer some background on this organization . 
my co - chair , Jacqueline Holzman , and I have agreed to make this a national celebration of excellence . 
we will acknowledge the living legacy of those honoured , and celebrate their excellence in areas of medical and health research , care and treatment on both sides of the Ottawa River . 
although we are recognizing their contributions to the medical field , our laureates have had a much wider impact on the community at large since we all benefit from the knowledge and scientific advancement they have contributed . 
whether you are a member of the business community , a representative of a health or social charity , a parliamentarian , a patient , a family member or friend , most certainly your life has been influenced by one or more of these 11 men and women . 
honourable senators , the following are the 1998 inductees to the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame : 
Norman Bethune devised new surgical instruments in Canada and , while working in Spain and China , brought the first mobile blood bank to the battlefield . 
Roberta Bondar , Canada ' s first female astronaut , studied weightlessness and physiological change in space and how it applies to life on earth . 
Tommy Douglas , Saskatchewan ' s long - time socialist premier , is the acknowledged father of the Canadian health care system . 
Claude Fortier , a world expert in neuroendocrinology , was one of the first clinician scientists to recognize computers as a tool for medical research . 
c . Miller Fisher focused his keen clinical observation techniques on stroke warning and prevention , and discovered that aspirin and other drugs can prevent stroke . 
Harold Jones improved the survival rate of thousands of cancer patients through his development of the Cobalt - 60 machine as well as his early work with CT scanners in mammography . 
Heinz Lehmann , a pioneer psychiatrist , recognized the importance of certain drugs in the treatment of mental disorders and led the movement to turn psychiatric hospitals into rehabilitation and treatment centres . 
Maud Menten , one of Canada ' s first female medical doctors , was the co - developer of a mathematical concept that helped shape the new field of biochemistry . 
we are hoping these inductees , along with the 25 men and women inducted in previous years , will inspire young people to take up careers in health and medical science . 
honourable senators , please join me in recognizing and honouring this group of superb individuals . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
foreign Affairs 
Mudslide Tragedy in Southern Italy 
hon. Marisa Ferretti Barth : 
honourable senators , it is with a great deal of emotion that I rise in this place to speak of a natural disaster that hit my country of origin , Italy , last week . 
after several days of violent , torrential rains , floods of mud gushed down the mountains onto six villages at the foot of Mount Sarno , which rises 1,100 metres above sea level , 30 kilometres southeast of Naples . 
as you know , Naples was the starting point of many Italian immigrants ' journey to America . 
Naples is also the home of bel canto . 
we all remember Torna Sorrento , O Solo Mio and Santa Lucia , which are known around the world . 
the people of Naples are simple people with a deep attachment to the values of life and nature : the sea , the sun and poetry . 
it is with great sadness that I learned of the great many casualties and extensive damage . 
according to unofficial reports , 116 people have died and - 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt you , Senator Ferretti Barth , but I am told that there is no interpretation . 
there is no interpretation at this point in time . 
perhaps we should wait a moment until the matter is corrected . 
senator Ferretti Barth : 
according to unofficial reports , 116 people have died and an indefinite number are missing . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i apologize once again , honourable senators , but we are still having technical difficulties . 
honourable senators , I will suspend the sitting of the Senate for whatever time is necessary to correct this technical problem . 
the sitting of the Senate resumed . 
senator Ferretti Barth : 
honourable senators , it is with great emotion that I rise to tell you about a natural catastrophe that hit my country of origin , Italy , last week . 
this is the homeland of the first immigrants who came to America and who brought along their customs , their culture and bel canto . 
everyone knows Torna Sorrento , O Sole Mio and Santa Lucia . 
the other day , I even heard a Japanese rendition of the song Santa Lucia , on television . 
it is with great sadness that I heard about the large number of casualties and the extent of the damage . 
according to preliminary reports , 116 died and an unknown number of people are missing . 
the village of Sarno , which has a population of 2,000 and is located less than 100 kilometres from Naples , was the hardest hit by the disaster . 
at last count , there were 107 people reported missing . 
but according to Sarno officials , the actual number could be twice as high . 
needless to say , Canadians of Italian origin have been deeply affected by this tragedy . 
as an Italian Canadian , I wish to offer my most sincere condolences to those who have lost loved ones . 
i sent a telegram of condolences to the mayor of Naples and the Italian ambassador . 
i sent it on behalf of all Canadian senators . 
i hope you will forgive me for doing so , but I felt it was necessary . 
criminal Harassment 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , stalking is a horrific crime that is treated far too lightly by the police , prosecutors , lawyers and judges . 
on August 6 , 1993 , Canada ' s first criminal harassment legislation , section 264 ( 1 ) of the Criminal Code , was proclaimed into force . 
criminal harassment , commonly referred to as " stalking , " is generally defined as repeatedly following or communicating with another person , repeatedly watching another person ' s house or workplace , or directly threatening another person or any member of their family , causing a person to fear for their safety or the safety of someone known to them . 
stalking is predatory in nature and plunges the victim into a world of fear and terror . 
night after night , day after day , the stalker focuses his or her activities on a single individual . 
a second characteristic of stalking that adds to its uniqueness is that the perpetrator usually undertakes , over a period of time , a series of increasingly more serious acts which escalate the level of threat and the victim ' s level of fear . 
a stalker ' s efforts to control and intimidate often escalate into violence . 
people pursued in this manner frequently find it necessary to change their entire lifestyle . 
others must undergo a complete identity change to escape the relentless pursuit of the stalker . 
such a program was set up in 1996 by HRDC , which has so far assisted 65 people . 
victims of stalkers are frequently female . 
a study by the United States Institute of Justice found that 8.2 million women and 2 million men had been stalked some time in their lives . 
the study also noted that the most frequent methods of harassment were making harassing statements and threats by phone , sending unwanted letters , vandalism , verbal and physical threats , showing up at a victim ' s workplace , innocuous phone calls and assaults . 
other forms may include sending unwanted gifts , leaving dead animals , making false accusations , and leaving a note on the victim ' s car . 
regrettably our courts and the police take issues of stalking and harassment far too lightly . 
in 1996 , our Justice Department conducted a review of Canada ' s 1993 stalking legislation . 
we must send a strong message to the stalker , to the justice system and to our police that stalking will not be tolerated in Canada . 
honourable senators , it is time for us to join together to improve our existing legislation . 
agriculture 
recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I should like to turn your attention once again to the matter of recombinant bovine growth hormone and the health concerns it raises . 
as Senator Keon pointed out last week in his excellent speech on this topic , there is a potential link between Insulin Growth Factor - One and cancer . 
as you may recall , we pointed out that IGF - 1 is found in milk produced by cows taking rBGH . 
while scientists had previously maintained that IGF - 1 was broken down by the digestive process , there is increasing evidence that this does not , in fact , occur . 
instead , as Dr. Keon told us , the hormone passes through the digestive tract and is absorbed into the bloodstream . 
the presence of this substance , it is feared , could lead to an increased rate of cancer . 
honourable senators , to underline this point , last Friday there were articles in both The Toronto Star and The Globe and Mail about a link between IGF - 1 and breast cancer . 
apparently , pre - menopausal women under 50 have a seven - times higher chance of developing breast cancer if they have elevated levels of IGF - 1 . 
this discovery was made by doctors from Canada and the United States who were funded partially by the Canadian Breast Cancer Initiative . 
their findings were published last week in the reputable British medical journal The Lancet . 
Canadian Corps of Commissionaires 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , on May 2 of this month , I had the pleasure of being a guest at the fiftieth anniversary dinner of the North Saskatchewan and Yukon Division of the Canadian Corps of Commissionaires . 
at the banquet , service awards were given to outstanding members of the North Saskatchewan Division in keeping with a proud history and long succession of important community service . 
in preparing for the banquet , I realized just how much the commissionaires contribute to our communities , and I wish to share with you some of the good work they carry out . 
the Corps of Commissionaires was founded in England in 1859 by Captain Edward Walter , a retired cavalry officer who , during and after the Crimean War , sought to improve the status of former soldiers and sailors who had served their time in the armed forces . 
his aim was to provide dignified and worthwhile employment for veterans , and he dedicated himself to making the latter days of their lives honoured and free from the fear of want . 
beginning with eight commissionaires , the corps has continued to grow . 
their honorary patron - in - chief is the Queen . 
the North Saskatchewan Division was granted its non - profit charter on July 15 , 1948 . 
the traditional role of the corps as a whole has been to provide services to communities and employment for former members of the armed forces and the RCMP . 
its advertising slogan is " Security and Much More . " 
the division provides training programs such as security guard training , management of police vehicles , weapons and radio training , prison fingerprinting and photography , and surveillance training for the four native casinos in Saskatchewan . 
from Manitoba west , it looks after the pay service for the RCMP guard and matron services . 
the signatory governors of the North Saskatchewan Division Charter were Captain J . H . Erwin , Colonel F . M. N . Matheson , Captain J . S . Woodward , and Captain Ross Pinder of Saskatoon . 
captain Pinder was the Honorary Chairman for the fiftieth anniversary celebrations . 
the first local commissionaire was Sergeant Frank Russell , who was stationed at the Saskatoon airport , and the first cheque was issued to a Corporal Grice for his work at the City of Saskatoon ' s greenhouses . 
honourable colleagues , we owe a great deal of thanks to the dedicated men and women of this organization who , I am sure , often are not thanked for their strong commitment to our communities and our country . 
i know I speak on behalf of all senators in extending to the Saskatoon Division our congratulations , and in wishing them every success during their fiftieth anniversary celebrations this year . 
aboriginal Veterans 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , I have been fortunate to receive documentation entitled Native Soldiers - Foreign Battles . 
i wish to speak today on the aboriginal soldiers who went to the First and Second World Wars and the Korean War . 
i believe that this information is very important to all of us , especially after having spent hours listening to witnesses during the Canadian War Museum hearings . 
the publication Native Soldiers - Foreign Battles was funded by Department of Veterans Affairs in 1993 , and put together with the assistance of M é tis , Treaty , Inuit , and other contributors . 
this publication takes you through the experiences of the Canadian , M é tis , Treaty and Inuit men who volunteered to go and help fight an international war in Europe . 
it is estimated that over 4,000 aboriginal volunteers went to the First World War . 
it reports outstanding accomplishments of men and women such as Tom Longboat , who was a world champion long - distance runner . 
the war proved that the fighting spirit of Canada ' s aboriginals was not squelched through reservation life or road - allowance living . 
when duty called , we were there , and when we were called forth to fight for the cause of freedom , our people showed all the bravery of our warriors of old . 
aboriginal women also worked overseas alongside our men . 
in the Second World War , there were 3,090 registered participants , not including the M é tis men and women and some First Nations and Inuit who are also excluded from the Indian Affairs registered tally . 
one volunteer is quoted as saying : 
in the Korean war , 73 names were recorded by the Indian Affairs branch . 
a final figure was not reported , although it is likely that several hundred aboriginals served during this period . 
i know that , because my husband was one of them . 
Syd Moore , a Second World War veteran , said : 
sons joined the army because their fathers had served in previous wars . 
brothers fought side by side . 
it is interesting to note that in 1950 , ships were named after Indian tribes such as the HMCS Sioux , the Iroquois , the Huron , the Haida , and the HMCS Micmac . 
these were testimony to the respect aboriginals had earned within the Canadian military . 
honourable senators , it is with pride that I bring this information to your attention , and I would recommend this publication to everyone , not only because of personal reasons , as my family served in the services , but also to remind us that our people , the M é tis , the Treaty , and the Inuit veterans , played a very important role in Canadian and European history . 
for copies of this publication , you may contact my office . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I draw your attention to the presence in our gallery of Mr. Yordan Sokolov , President of the National Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria , as well as members of the Bulgarian National Assembly . 
the delegation is accompanied by His Excellency , Mr. Slav Vassilev Dabev , Ambassador of the Republic of Bulgaria . 
welcome . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , before proceeding , I wish to introduce two pages from the House of Commons who are taking part in the Parliamentary Pages Exchange Program . 
David Sommer is studying in the Arts Faculty at Carleton University . 
David ' s hometown is Pierrefonds , Qu é bec . 
welcome to the Senate . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
postponement of Meeting of committee 
on Presentation of Reports from Standing or Special Committees : 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , let me take the occasion offered by this item to make an announcement on behalf the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
we had hoped to meet this afternoon at 3:30 p.m. to continue our study of Bill S - 13 , Senator Kenny ' s bill . 
unfortunately , it appears that we will be occupied in the chamber until five o ' clock or later with Royal Assent and other business . 
i have therefore postponed this afternoon ' s meeting until 5:30 p.m. 
the Senate 
notice of Motion to Permit the Taking of Photographs During Royal Assent Ceremony 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) I move , seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal : 
that two photographers be authorized to take still photographs during the Royal Assent ceremony today from the floor of the chamber and the galleries , with the least possible disruption of the proceedings . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I ask the Deputy Leader of the Government to provide some background and explanation for this notice . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
perhaps the Chair could be allowed to first put the motion and then you can have this exchange . 
an Hon. Senator : 
you must have leave . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) , the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal , moved : 
that two photographers be authorized to take still photographs during the Royal Assent ceremony today from the floor of the chamber and the galleries , with the least possible disruption of the proceedings . 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , the Deputy Leader of the Government asked for leave to introduce a motion . 
before giving her leave to introduce the motion we would like to know why she wants leave . 
otherwise , we shall refuse her leave . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , as I explained to Senator Kinsella last evening , the request had been made to the Senate for a photographer from The Ottawa Citizen to take pictures of the ceremony on Royal Assent . 
we were extremely reluctant to give that permission because , generally speaking , we do not allow photographs to be taken in the chamber . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , in discussing the purpose of leave , I find this a rather extraordinary situation : an opposition bill is already assumed to have been passed , and we are now being asked to anticipate that its effects are already in place . 
i suggest that we pass the bill and then have the photographers in . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
then leave is not granted ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
No. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
senator Prud ' homme , this matter is not debatable because leave was not granted , if are you standing on this matter . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
it was on that subject . 
i would have many questions but now the matter has been disposed of . 
i did not want it disposed of without knowing exactly what was involved . 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , May 13 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal , moved that , when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Wednesday , May 13 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. Is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I wish to know if arrangements have been made on both sides of the chamber for the Senate to adjourn tomorrow at 3:30 p.m. 
senator Carstairs : 
it certainly is the intention on this side to proceed as quickly as possible . 
of course , I cannot respond for the other side . 
perhaps the honourable senator would like to put the question to the other side of the chamber , because arrangements that I thought I had , I obviously do not have . 
hon. No ë l Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if the Senate is still sitting tomorrow at 3:15 p.m. , I would like to move a motion to adjourn . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , it is all very well for both sides to speak but , if unanimous consent is required , senators will have to understand that the telephone never hurts anyone . 
all the independent senators are here today . 
when the rules call for unanimous consent , do not force us to say no to be disagreeable or to get your attention . 
i was consulted today about a rather contentious subject . 
i gave my word that I would probably let it pass . 
it does not hurt to think that we are also part of the Senate . 
if that bothers certain senators , then change the rules . 
it is simple . 
if the rules require unanimous consent , bear that in mind . 
i got everything I wanted in the House of Commons because I was smart enough to go and see the people who could say no , including the mayor of Moncton , Mr. Jones . 
it does not cost too much to ask , otherwise you will get no cooperation . 
it is easy . 
at the moment I believe someone has asked the right question : 
why 15:30 tomorrow ? 
of course to that I will say yes , but do not pretend that we are not there . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators have heard the motion . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Donald H . Oliver presented Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall the bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Oliver , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next . 
child Custody and Access 
notice of Inquiry - Participation of Members of House of Commons in Hearings of Committee 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 56 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) and 57 ( 2 ) , I give notice that two days hence I will call the attention of the Senate to the poor attendance and participation of the House of Commons members in the work meetings and hearings of the Special Joint Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons on Child Custody and Access . 
question PERIOD 
health 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial and Territorial Ministers - Possibility of Senate Debate 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
in light of that , would he not agree that in order to fulfil the intent of motion number 67 on our Order Paper today , which is , of course , the motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton to the effect that the Senate of Canada adopt a position with regard to the matter of hepatitis C and acquaint the provincial , territorial and federal ministers of health with our position , we should conclude our evaluation of this matter expeditiously so that the ministers ' meeting later this week can have the benefit of the advice and recommendation of this house ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am aware that a number of senators want to participate in the debate , and the matter will unfold as it should . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
senator Graham : 
as I said , honourable senators , the matter will unfold as it should . 
there will be debate in this place and the matter will come to a vote at a time when it is considered debated . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
would the government leader agree to a house order that this matter be brought to a vote at the latest on Thursday afternoon ? 
senator Graham : 
No. 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
therefore , the government is telling us that they have no interest in seeing that this motion , which carries an important message , be disposed of at the appropriate time . 
senator Graham : 
that is not so . 
you can puts lots of strings in your bow , Senator Lynch - Staunton , but I think the first thing you should recognize is that it was Minister Allan Rock who brought all of the ministers of health to the table , and it was Minister Allan Rock , the federal Minister of Health , who provided the initiative and the thrust to bring about the agreement which will provide $ 1.1 billion to Canadians affected by hepatitis C between 1986 and 1990 . 
we are hearing echoes from other people who are trying to take political advantage of a very sad situation . 
i am speaking of people such as Premier Michael Harris of Ontario , and those premiers who did not want to participate in the first place , some of whom were dragged kicking and screaming to the table by the federal Minister of Health . 
we will see what happens on Thursday , and what is the outcome of those meetings . 
then , honourable senators , we should be prepared to participate fully in the debate today , tomorrow , Thursday and , if necessary , next week . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
what we are asking is that the voice of the Senate be heard before the fact , not after . 
the Leader of the Government is telling us that , where the government ' s problems are involved , it does not matter when the voice of the Senate is heard , or that it is preferably after the fact , and I find that shameful . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , many honourable senators wish to speak on this issue , and I am very anxious to hear what they have to say . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we , too , are anxious to have them speak . 
let them speak tonight and tomorrow , so that we can let the ministers of health from every province and territory , as well as the federal minister , hear our voice and know our feelings before they meet , not after . 
we are willing to meet tonight on this issue , if the government agrees . 
national Defence 
requirement for Reserves to Relinquish Medical Benefits on Retirement from Military - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
since the Government of Canada ' s policy is that Canada has a total force composed of both reserve and regular components , can the minister tell me why reserve force members must give up their benefits under the Government Service Medical Insurance Plan - GSMIP - when they leave the military , unlike members of the regular forces and the RCMP ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I was not aware that that was the case , but I certainly will seek an appropriate answer , one , it is to be hoped , that will satisfy my honourable friend ' s concerns . 
it is a matter that I will refer directly to the attention of those who are most responsible . 
reported Lack of Funds for Training of Reserves - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , further to that , can the minister comment on discussions held in the last week of March at CFB Kingston , discussions which focused on army training and limiting reserve army troop training to the level of TQ 1 , trade qualification 1 , which is just above the recruit level , due to a lack of funds ? 
will reservists no longer enjoy the privilege of advanced training and career advancement in addition to losing their health benefits ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will seek a proper answer to that question as well . 
limitation on Duration of Training and Cancellation of Yearly Exercise - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
finally , could the Leader of the Government ascertain for us whether it is true that soldiers of the reserve army in Atlantic Canada are only allowed to train to a maximum of 32 days a year and have had cancelled , by this government , the standard yearly brigade exercise due to a lack of funds ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not aware that that is the situation but , again , I shall seek further information for my honourable friend . 
the Economy 
widening of Gap Between Rich and Poor Families - Effect of Enhanced Child Benefit - Government Position 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the poor are getting poorer . 
in 1993 , the average low - income family fell $ 7,665 below what Statistics Canada categorizes as its low - income cut - off , and what everyone else calls the poverty line . 
for two - parent families , the shortfall deepened from $ 8,675 to $ 9,634 below the poverty line . 
for single parents , the gap widened from $ 8,262 to $ 9,300 . 
put another way , honourable senators , in the first three years of the government ' s mandate , the average poor family fell deeper into poverty by about $ 1,000 . 
Armand Brun of the National Council on Welfare predicted at a press conference yesterday that data for 1997 will show that the gap between the rich and the poor is widening even more . 
the government ' s response to this was to point to their so - called enhanced child benefit . 
i have several questions arising from this situation . 
to what extent will this benefit restore the ground that families with children have lost since 1993 ? Will it restore all of the lost ground , or just a fraction of the lost ground ? 
how far below the poverty line will the average low - income family be after the benefit takes effect ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am very much aware of Senator Cohen ' s concerns in this regard . 
we took to heart her report last year regarding poverty in Canada . 
the poverty profile as announced by the National Council on Welfare , which provides demographic trends affecting the income of Canadians , was a detailed analysis of poverty in 1996 . 
i am very conscious of the National Council on Welfare and its work . 
i think that all of us should be disappointed to see that the numbers in the low income bracket did not decline in 1996 . 
obviously , the economy did not grow as much between 1995 and 1996 as everyone would have hoped . 
however , I believe that the situation has turned around and the government ' s policies are working . 
the Canadian economy has created over 1 million jobs since November , 1993 ; 543,000 since January of last year alone . 
the unemployment rate declined from an average of 9.7 per cent in 1996 to 8.4 per cent in April of 1998 . As a result , the economy is poised to create hundreds of thousands of jobs in the coming years , which will help more Canadians move out of that low income category . 
we have put our fiscal house in order , honourable senators , precisely in order that we can address the priorities and the social needs of Canadians while living within our means . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
tell us about TAGS ! 
indexation Level of National Child Benefit - Government Position 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the increase in jobs was mostly in part - time jobs , and in New Brunswick , unfortunately , employment has dropped in the last year . 
the National Child Benefit is not fully indexed to inflation ; neither is the income threshold below which benefits are reduced . 
this means that benefits will fall in real terms each and every year . 
the House of Commons recently passed a Progressive Conservative Private Member ' s motion calling on the government to review the level at which the child benefit is indexed . 
given the crisis situation of child poverty in Canada , when will the government act upon this motion ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would repeat that the report which was released yesterday covers only 1995 incomes . 
i am very conscious of Senator Cohen ' s concerns . 
she is not alone in her concerns . 
the honourable senator states that the majority of the jobs created were part - time jobs . 
i would dispute that figure , and I intend to bring forward statistics to indicate that the majority of the jobs created were , indeed , full - time jobs . 
that is not high enough ; however , it does demonstrate that our economy is growing and that our policies are working . 
international Trade 
visit to Italy of Team of Parliamentarians of Italian Origin - Exclusion of Parliamentarians of Other Ethnic Origins - Government Position 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , the government has embarked upon a number of questionable endeavours which have surprised even the most steely - nerved Parliamentarians . 
recently , the Liberal government announced that it would send members of Parliament of Italian origin from both the House of Commons and the Senate on a taxpayer - funded trade mission to Italy led by Trade Minister Marchi and Public Works Minister Gagliano . 
i received in my office today a news release from the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade dated May 11 , 1998 , numbered 115 , that states : 
as home to 1.5 million Canadians of Italian origin , Canada has a comparative advantage , when it comes to doing business with Italy . 
these strong people - to - people ties between Canada and Italy will continue to shape and enhance our business relationship in the future . 
at a time when the 1997 Canadian Human Rights Commission Annual Report cites the federal government for being unresponsive and insensitive to the issue of multiculturalism and hiring practices , we have taxpayers ' money funding a trade mission based solely on ethnic origin . 
if it is determined that an MP or senator is qualified to take part in this trade mission , are they disqualified from participation based on their ethnicity ? 
if not , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate advise us what consideration would be given to a parliamentarian of African , Asian or aboriginal descent ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , they would receive every possible consideration . 
this is a golden opportunity , a wonderful opportunity , to send proud Canadians of Italian heritage to Italy to demonstrate to that country what a wonderful place Canada is by leading the world in getting its fiscal house in order . 
canada leads the world with its trade missions abroad . 
consider the successes of Team Canada . 
it is just a pity that Senator Di Nino is not going back to the land of his birth - 
senator Di Nino : 
i would do it at my own expense . 
senator Graham : - to demonstrate to Italians the great success that you be achieved in this wonderful country of Canada . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question of the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
is the criterion for selection to be of Italian origin ; is the criterion the ability to speak Italiano , one of the great trading languages of the world ; or is the criterion to have business relations with the Italian business community which could be based upon grounds other than ethnic origin ? 
senator Di Nino : 
you just want an invitation . 
senator Graham : 
may I ask a question of Senator Kinsella who is very learned ? 
i presume that Italian is one of the many languages he speaks . 
i regret very much that he was not included in the invitations , but I would refer honourable senators to Senator Ferretti Barth ' s very moving statement about the difficulties which were experienced by people from the part of Italy from whence she and her people came . 
that is the kind of sensitivity of which I speak . 
it was a warm statement of her feelings for the land of her birth and that of her ancestors . 
i am sure that all honourable senators appreciate that she was prepared to bring those sentiments to this chamber . 
health 
full Compensation for Victims of Hepatitis C - Possible Establishment of Joint Committee - Request for Answer 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
i would ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate to relay to the minister the following quotation which was part of my question on that day : 
i am not denying that tonight ' s vote is an important first step , but if anyone here believes that that is the end of the question then they are dreaming in Technicolor . 
it will only grow and become more difficult . 
any good politician can see that this situation will develop . 
there will be no end to it . 
honourable senators , that is exactly where we are now . 
i suggested that we form a joint Senate and House of Commons committee , as we did so ably on the question of child custody and access . 
that committee held hearings across Canada . 
however , we may be too late to rectify this terrible mess in which everyone finds himself . 
any old poltician could have told us that . 
could it be that there is still time to save the day and to stop all these power struggles between provinces and the federal government ? 
does the minister have any suggestions as to how the Senate can be of use to the country by working to ensure that at least my proposal is considered ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have taken Senator Prud ' homme ' s suggestion to the Minister of Health and he has that under consideration . 
however , both Houses are required to respond . 
you have put that on the table . 
i would urge all honourable senators to wait to see what determination is made at the meeting of the ministers of health on Thursday . 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permits for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa - Request for Answer 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I suggested that this matter should be taken very seriously . 
i am afraid it was not taken seriously . 
today , there is a great delegation in Ottawa who yesterday were kindly received by Dr. Keon . 
i praise him for what he has done for Canada . 
he opened the doors to The Ottawa Heart Institute and welcomed the delegates . 
that institute is recognized all over the world as being the best teaching hospital . 
senator Dr. Keon personally trained three of these Saudi Arabian doctors who are now working in all parts of the world . 
that is what Saudi Arabia and Canada can do together . 
however , I hear that nothing has been done regarding the embassy . 
the question now is why the capital of Canada is not applying more pressure regarding the issuance of a building permit for the Saudi Arabian embassy . 
some of you here may not understand the Middle East . 
i have paid the price to know about it . 
their pride is being attacked ; that is how they see it . 
they are proud people in the Gulf . 
if they think their pride is being attacked , it is considered by them to be an enormous insult . 
yet they drag their feet and attack the pride of the Saudi people . 
i know that the Leader of the Government in the Senate is not responsible for this situation . 
however , could he convey my concern to those who could be useful ? 
today , our Speaker is absent from the chamber . 
where is he ? 
i know he is doing a great job for Canada by promoting our candidacy for the UN Security Council . 
we must not take for granted that we will be elected to the Security Council . 
i am the only one who has the guts to say it publicly . 
i just met ambassadors at noon who said , " Canada better campaign . " 
this is the first time in my life that I know of that Canada has had to campaign for something . 
has the Leader of the Government put these thoughts forward to the government since I asked him the question last week ? 
it is in the interests of all of Canada . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
yes , honourable senators , I have brought the matter to the attention of the government . 
industry 
difficulties with Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Impediment to Job Creation - Government Position 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in its comprehensive report , it is concluded that " progress toward a more united Canadian market has ground to a virtual halt since the signing of the Agreement on Internal Trade . " 
given that our unemployment rate persists at over 8 per cent , will the Leader of the Government in the Senate ask the Prime Minister to advise Canadians what concrete steps his government is taking to deal with these interprovincial impediments to job creation ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not think anyone is satisfied with the progress being made with respect to internal trade . 
as I indicated earlier , some 72,000 jobs were created in the month of April alone . 
obviously , some progress is being made . 
we are not satisfied with the progress that has been made with respect to trade between provinces . 
however , I should be happy to bring the Honourable Senator Kelleher ' s concerns to the attention of those most responsible . 
difficulties with Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Failure to Fulfil Sectoral Agreements - overnment Position 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
will the Leader of the Government ask the Minister of Industry to provide us with a detailed list of these missed deadlines , explain why each one has been missed , and describe the concrete steps the government is taking to meet these deadlines and honour its commitments to the Canadian people ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
yes , I shall do that , honourable senators . 
at the same time , I shall congratulate the Minister of Industry and other colleagues responsible for the fact that employment growth in Canada will lead all of the G 7 countries this year . 
the Senate 
lack of Availability of Aboriginal Committee Room for Meeting of Aboriginal Peoples Committee - Government Position 
hon. Willie Adams : 
honourable senators , my question is somewhat different from the others that have been asked today . 
the Aboriginal Peoples Committee of which I am a member has been meeting for the last while on Bill C - 6 . 
i was disappointed by the response I received from both the Deputy Leader of the Government and the government Whip when I asked why the committee could not meet this morning in the Aboriginal Peoples Room . 
this morning , the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology met in the Aboriginal Peoples Room while the Aboriginal Peoples Committee had to meet in Room 705 of the Victoria Building , which is little more than a cubby hole . 
bill C - 6 is an important bill for our people in the territories . 
aboriginal people have come to Ottawa to meet us on this bill . 
i point out to the Leader of the Government in the Senate that there are committee rooms in the East Block which are equipped to broadcast committee proceedings . 
when I arrived at the committee meeting this morning , the sign on which is printed the name of the committee was in print smaller than the signs which bear the names of senators on their office doors . 
it was very small . 
i do not know who makes these signs . 
the Aboriginal Peoples Room is equipped with an executive anteroom which our caucus has been using for food and coffee . 
we also invite those who appear before the committee to join us in this room . 
however , we are unable to use it now because it is being used by the Social Affairs Committee . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would take great delight in allocating the blame to Senator Murray , who is chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , for taking over the Aboriginal Peoples Room this morning . 
however , I shall refrain from doing so because I think this is an organizational problem . 
i understand the concerns expressed by Senator Adams . 
we will have to attend to the allocating of committee rooms . 
presumably , the Social Affairs Committee was there first . 
i would hope the Aboriginal Peoples Committee will be able to hold its meetings there when it is available . 
of course , that room , which is designated as the Aboriginal Peoples Room , is open to all other committees as well . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology has a room in which we meet weekly . 
that room is Room 705 in the Victoria Building . 
the reason we were moved to the Aboriginal Peoples Room for these two days is that there are televised hearings on Senator Kenny ' s Bill S - 13 and Room 705 in the Victoria Building was not commodious enough or equipped to handle the number of witnesses , the public , the television equipment and so on that is necessary . 
however , we will be out of the room tomorrow and back to our own room in the Victoria Building . 
senator Adams : 
honourable senators , what is the difference between Bill C - 6 and Senator Kenny ' s Bill S - 13 ? 
there is the feeling that his bill is more important than Bill C - 6 . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I hope my friend realizes that neither I nor my committee is in a position to commandeer that room or any other . 
i believe a request went forward for a room that was adequate for the purposes of this bill on these two days , and the Aboriginal Peoples Room was assigned to us . 
i am very sorry if that has caused inconvenience or embarrassment to others . 
however , as I said , we will be out of that room tomorrow and back to our accustomed spot in the Victoria Building , which is much more convenient for some of us who have offices in that building . 
treasury Board 
solicitation of Political Donations from List of Government Grant Applicants - Status of Employee Involved - Sensitivity of Ministerial Staff to Issues - Government Position 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , a Liberal fundraiser was recently convicted for soliciting political donations from a list of government grant applicants provided by the Office of the President of the Treasury Board . 
over and above the legal and political impropriety of this act , the release of such information violates the spirit if not the letter of the Privacy Act . 
could the minister tell this house what steps have been taken by his cabinet colleague , the President of the Treasury Board , to deal with the employee who provided this information and , at the same time , whether he and other members of the cabinet are taking the necessary action to ensure that those personal or exempt staff working in ministerial offices understand the law and also Canada ' s Privacy Act ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that particular case is closed . 
it has been dealt with in the courts . 
certainly , ministers are very cognizant of the concerns expressed by my honourable friend , and they will be taking extra precautions to alert all staff members as to those concerns . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate is the political leader for Nova Scotia and can , no doubt , appreciate the sensitivity of information in ministers ' offices . 
he would also agree , no doubt , that it is necessary for the personal staff of ministers to act in an appropriate manner at all times . 
the President of the Treasury Board appears to have washed his hands of this whole affair and refuses to take action or to answer a very simple , specific question . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us whether the President of the Treasury Board continues to employ Mr. Jacques Roy , who according to court documents was the person who provided this information to the fundraiser who has now been charged and sentenced ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the President of the Treasury Board acted appropriately in this case . 
as a matter of fact , if I recall correctly , he was the first to alert the authorities of this difficulty . 
as to whether Mr. Roy is still employed , I shall have to inquire further . 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I am pleased to speak to Bill S - 2 and to thank all senators for their cooperation in considering this bill to amend the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act . 
the act is already effective . 
when it was proclaimed law in 1990 , it led to the creation of the Transportation Safety Board of Canada . 
this board is an independent federal body responsible for investigating marine , rail , air and pipeline accidents and incidents . 
canada is one of the few countries in the world to have an independent transportation accident investigation body , but Canada ' s approach is increasingly widespread . 
a number of countries have drawn on our legislation to set up their own organizations . 
following the examination required by the current law and on the basis of the experience of the Canada Transportation Safety Board , which covers the past seven years , a number of changes are now being proposed to the law . 
while already effective , these changes will result in certain improvements . 
honourable senators , the proposed changes reflect suggestions from the transportation industry and from government at both the federal and provincial levels . 
for example , one of the proposed changes would make it easier for the Transportation Safety Board to respond to requests from the provinces to conduct safety investigations for them on a cost recovery basis . 
other changes prompted by industry clarify the nature and the extent of the protection of information supplied to the board in its investigations . 
as the board ' s sole object is to advance transportation safety , there are several proposals to put increased emphasis on the identification of safety deficiencies . 
similarly , several proposals would make the board ' s procedures less court - like and further separate the board ' s work from that of the police and from legal proceedings . 
honourable senators , before the bill was tabled in the Senate , we consulted the transportation industry and representatives of the provinces . 
since then , the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have heard and considered testimony from people representing various aspects of the transportation sector . 
the members of the committee came to realize that there was support generally for the changes to the current law . 
honourable senators , there was also some discussion of the possibility of extending the mandate of the board to include extra - provincial trucking . 
the idea has merit , but it is beyond the scope of the proposed amendments . 
it might well be studied at some future time . 
there was also consideration of what other industrialized nations are doing in the field of transportation accident investigation . 
a few senators attended the second World Congress on Transportation Safety in the Netherlands where transportation safety issues were considered . 
there , and in other European nations , it was clear that the Canadian approach to transportation accident investigation is held in high regard . 
if there is a key word to describe the philosophy contained in this act , it is " cooperation . " 
i invite all honourable senators in this chamber to participate in this cooperative spirit and to support this excellent legislation . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I should like to propose an amendment to this bill at third reading , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cochrane . 
the amendment is that the bill not be now read a third time , but that it be amended . 
i spoke to this at the report stage , and I have a few comments . 
they will be printed in the proceedings today , and they will be on the Order Paper tomorrow in full so that senators may read them . 
is that agreeable ? 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
the Chair has an obligation to put amendment or amendments before the house . 
is it the intention of the honourable senator to proceed with her remarks ? 
senator Spivak : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Spivak , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cochrane , that the bill be not now read the third time but that it be amended as follows : 
shall I dispense , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed : 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , there are three reasons for proposing this amendment to the bill . 
i must disagree with the Honourable Senator Poulin , which is a very rare occurrence . 
she tells us that the amendment goes beyond the scope proposed in this bill . 
indeed , it does not . 
the first reason I propose this amendment is that the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act included a mandate for a review commission to study the bill . 
indeed , that was done . 
even though clause 11 opens the door to the review and investigation of highway accidents , the point is that it falls short of the mark in the sense that it does not achieve that separation between Transport Canada and the investigator , the Safety Board , nor does it give the Safety Board the means by which to investigate the accident . 
bill S - 2 makes no mention of extra - provincial motor vehicle accidents , and they are not included in the definitions of a transportation occurrence or in the section regarding the expertise of board members or in the hiring of directors of investigation . 
if the government does intend to allow the board to launch investigations on behalf of provinces that ask for them , surely we have a duty to ensure that the board will have knowledgeable people to perform these tasks . 
the second reason for proposing this amendment is that there are as many highway traffic accidents involving commercial trucks as all other commercial accidents combined . 
these incidents do not form a small portion of the safety investigations which take place in our country , in fact , they form the largest portion . 
why would we just go half - way with this measure ? 
why do we not give the board the mandate to investigate interprovincial accidents ? 
they are not impinging upon the jurisdiction of the provinces . 
the third reason I propose this amendment is that our committee heard compelling evidence from the National Safety Board of the United States of America . 
they are also a federal country . 
they have had this mandate for a long time and they do an excellent job . 
most of their reviews involve transportation safety , so it is not new to them . 
honourable senators , I received a copy of the Railway Association of Canada ' s response to a review of the " Motor Vehicle Transport Act Position Paper " by Transport Canada . 
the Railway Association of Canada recommends that the federal government reassume its jurisdictional authority for interprovincial motor carrier operations . 
the government should use its constitutional authority to expand the role of the Transportation Safety Board to cover interprovincial motor vehicle safety , and it should use its constitutional authority to ensure uniform technical operating and safety standards for motor carriers . 
in support of this policy direction , Transport Canada should compare the jurisdictional , legislative , regulatory and policy framework for trucking in Canada and the U.S. and between truck and rail transportation in Canada . 
honourable senators , I believe that this will be a suitable expansion since it has been recommended by the government review commission itself . 
had I been in the committee during the clause - by - clause , I would have presented this amendment and it could have been reviewed by the members of the committee at that time . 
however , time did not permit that to happen . 
i commend this amendment to you . 
it is not opposed to what I presume should be government policy , since the government review commission recommended it . 
it is hardly a radical suggestion . 
it has been in practice in the United States for some time . 
it is important to look at the major causes of highway deaths and determine if we can learn from those through proper investigation so as to prevent a repetition of them . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I would inform honourable senators that , due to the length of the amendments presented by the Honourable Senator Spivak , the Chair would like to take their import under advisement to ascertain that they are well within the scope of the bill and are , therefore , acceptable . 
i will endeavour to report back to the house at the very earliest opportunity on that matter . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I was about to move the adjournment in the name of Senator De Ban é , but if we are to have a Speaker ' s Ruling , I am not sure that is necessary . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
as there may not necessarily be a ruling , it would be in order to adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator De Ban é , debate adjourned . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1998 
second reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool , for the second reading of Bill S - 16 , An Act to implement an agreement between Canada and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam , an agreement between Canada and the Republic of Croatia and a convention between Canada and the Republic of Chile , for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
hon. Normand Grimard : 
honourable senators , I was pleased to accept the invitation to speak on behalf of the Official Opposition in the Senate on Bill S - 16 , the Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act , 1998 . 
first of all , honourable senators , I must state my approval of having bills such as the one we are looking at today tabled in the Senate rather than in the other place . 
as you know , enabling legislation such as this is tabled as new tax agreements are concluded and the legislation in effect is modified as soon as a need is felt . 
there is nothing particularly unusual about that . 
a few years ago , this house generally looked at these bills before the Lower House . 
during the last Parliament , in response to pressures by certain members of the other place , the government modified its approach . 
generally , there is nothing controversial about legislation to implement taxation agreements . 
since such bills neither increase nor decrease the tax burden of the Canadian taxpayer , they present no problems . 
i believe that we can make a valuable contribution to the parliamentary process by looking at these bills in a totally neutral and constructive manner before sending them to the other House . 
thus , honourable senators , the bill before us will enable Canada to ratify tax conventions with Chile , Vietnam and Croatia . 
canada is a trading nation . 
last year , we exported $ 344 billion worth of goods and services , while we imported $ 329 billion worth . 
both the Liberal and the Progressive Conservative governments have made efforts in this regard so that today we have some 70 such conventions . 
tax conventions have two main objectives . 
first , they establish which country is entitled to withhold tax and at what rate when a resident or a business from one country earns income in another . 
in addition , they ensure that the tax paid in one country is acknowledged in the other . 
so , you know exactly the amount of source deductions made on income you want to take out of the country where you earned it . 
this enables you to invest and make money in the certainty that the foreign country will not take away your profits by suddenly imposing additional source deductions . 
such certainty is vital to business people and investors . 
establishing a climate of trust is a vital economic objective and there are many ways to do so : through tax conventions like the one before us , as well as through trade agreements such as NAFTA , the World Trade Organization or the proposed free trade agreement with the Americas . 
second , tax conventions help prevent tax evasion , which occurs when income earned in a foreign country is not declared in Canada . 
the agreements provide a mechanism for exchanging information . 
this is a particularly commendable objective , in my opinion . 
when Senator Hervieux - Payette spoke at second reading of this bill , she closed her remarks by saying , and I quote : 
i urge you , honourable senators , to pass Bill S - 16 without delay so that Canadians may begin to reap the benefits . 
honourable senators , her wish will come true , because the official opposition fully supports the fundamental principle of Bill S - 16 . 
the committee will of course examine it to ensure that all is in order . 
motion agreed to and bill read the second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading - Debate Suspended 
on the Order : 
resuming the debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator Milne , for the second reading of the Bill C - 28 , An Act to amend the Income Tax Act , the Income Tax Application Rules , the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act , the Canada Pension Plan , the Children ' s Special Allowances Act , the Companies ' Creditors Arrangement Act , the Cultural Property Export and Import Act , the Customs Act , the Customs Tariff , the Employment Insurance Act , the Excise Tax Act , the Federal - Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act , the Income Tax Conventions Interpretation Act , the Old Age Security Act , the Tax Court of Canada Act , the Tax Rebate Discounting Act , the Unemployment Insurance Act , the Western Grain Transition Payments Act and certain Acts related to the Income Tax Act . 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , this is a bill amending the Income Tax Act as announced in the February 1997 - 98 budget . 
bill C - 28 is a collection of minor amendments , tax measures , some of them good and some of them less so , some of them questionable , some of them welcome and long overdue . 
these measures from the 1997 budget , with the notable exception of the extension of the bank tax , brought selective tax relief . 
i know I am repeating myself , but our side would have liked to see a general reduction in taxes similar to the reduction in Ontario over the last two years . 
this was what my party proposed in 1997 . 
economists are telling us that there has been a substantial and strong economic recovery in Ontario over the past year . 
bill C - 28 is another product of a government that is lazy , lacks courage , acts without thinking , is short - sighted , and tinkers with the economy rather than eliminating barriers to interprovincial trade that continue to put a strain on the Canadian economy , thus denying Canada the comparative advantage of free trade . 
one of the only important measures in this bill is the $ 12 billion Canada transfer that will cost the seven poorest provinces , including New Brunswick , $ 384 million between now and 2002 . 
in fact , except for Ontario , Alberta and British Columbia , the other provinces will receive less money as a result of the transfer . 
in her address in the Senate , the Deputy Leader of the Government argued that this house should support Bill C - 28 and adopt it without delay because of the important measures contained therein and because of the fact that the provisions have been in the public domain for some time now . 
the honourable senator also suggested that the bill reflects the federal government ' s approach to fiscal management , providing the basis for a strong economy and a strong society . 
i thank the honourable senators for opening the door to allow me to address the bill in a similar fashion . 
that bill received first reading on March 19 , 1998 , less than one month after the tabling of the budget . 
the government is obviously capable of speedily marshalling legislation through Parliament when doing so assists the Minister of Finance in his quarrels with the Auditor General . 
bill C - 28 , which implements some provisions of the 1997 budget , and some measures that are even older , received first reading in the House of Commons on December 10 , 1997 . 
having said that , I would like to address another , even more important argument put forward by the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
i would like to discuss how this bill reflects the federal government ' s approach to economic and tax policy . 
clause 285 , which calls for an increase in the threshold for the cash portion of transfer payments to the provinces and territories under the Canada health and social transfer , is a good example of the government ' s approach to tax policy , economic policy in general and federal - provincial relations in particular . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 135 ( 8 ) , I must interrupt our proceedings . 
the Senate will now adjourn during pleasure to await the arrival of His Excellency the Governor General . 
the Senate adjourned during pleasure . 
royal Assent 
an Act respecting an accord between the Governments of Canada and the Yukon Territory relating to the administration and control of and legislative jurisdiction in respect of oil and gas ( Bill C - 8 , Chapter 5 , 1998 ) 
an Act to amend the Canada Shipping Act ( maritime liability ) ( Bill S - 4 , Chapter 6 , 1998 ) 
an Act to amend the Customs Act and the Criminal Code ( Bill C - 18 , Chapter 7 , 1998 ) 
an Act to amend the Telecommunications Act and the Teleglobe Canada Reorganization and Divestiture Act ( Bill C - 17 , Chapter 8 , 1998 ) 
an Act to amend the Canada Evidence Act and the Criminal Code in respect of persons with disabilities , to amend the Canadian Human Rights Act in respect of persons with disabilities and other matters and to make consequential amendments to other acts ( Bill S - 5 , Chapter 9 , 1998 ) 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to give the Royal Assent to the said bills . 
the House of Commons withdrew . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to retire . 
the sitting of the Senate was resumed . 
income Tax Amendments Bill , 1997 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator Milne , for the second reading of Bill C - 28 , An Act to amend the Income Tax Act , the Income Tax Application Rules , the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act , the Canada Pension Plan , the Children ' s Special Allowances Act , the Companies ' Creditors Arrangement Act , the Cultural Property Export and Import Act , the Customs Act , the Customs Tariff , the Employment Insurance Act , the Excise Tax Act , the Federal - Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act , the Income Tax Conventions Interpretation Act , the Old Age Security Act , the Tax Court of Canada Act , the Tax Rebate Discounting Act , the Unemployment Insurance Act , the Western Grain Transition Payments Act and certain Acts related to the Income Tax Act . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , Senator Simard had the floor . 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , as I said earlier , the government boasts of its decision to increase the cash portion from $ 11 billion to $ 12.5 billion . 
in 1994 - 95 , federal funding transfers for programs merged under the CHST totalled $ 19.3 billion . 
this means that the floor of $ 12.5 billion for the cash portion represents a 33 - per - cent reduction in federal funding transfers . 
it is true that the government is also transferring resources through tax points , and that these did not diminish as much as the cash portion . 
however , fund transfers have a political and economic importance that tax points cannot have . 
it is by threatening to withhold these amounts that the federal government can impose on the provinces and territories certain conditions regarding health and social services . 
so , the amount of $ 12.5 billion represents a considerable reduction of the resources on which the provinces depend , and it is significant enough that the provinces cannot do without it . 
indeed , the provinces are in the worst possible situation , with significantly reduced resources and very heavy financial obligations , while the federal government is in the opposite situation , with considerably lower financial obligations to the provinces and a high degree of influence . 
surely , there must be better models for federal - provincial relations . 
the honourable senator also suggests that the policy underlying Bill C - 28 is both fair and transparent . 
it falls to the provinces then to close hospitals , laying themselves open to criticism for doing so , while the federal government reaps the benefits of this most painful restructuring . 
in many other cases , the federal action is far from transparent . 
let us take the example of the employment insurance fund . 
employment insurance benefits and the administration of the program are funded exclusively by employer and employee contributions . 
after the last recession , the fund had a deficit which ran as high as $ 6 billion by 1993 , and the government wanted to keep contributions relatively high in order to eliminate this deficit . 
then the government decided that the fund would accumulate a surplus , so that it would never again be necessary to raise contributions right when unemployment was at its highest . 
according to the 1995 budget : 
with no increase in premium rates , the surplus in the Account will be allowed to rise above $ 5 billion through to the end of 1996 . 
this surplus will be maintained and used as a buffer to mitigate unemployment insurance premium rate increases during periods of slowing economic growth . 
this is a highly prudent approach , which few Canadians could fault . 
we know , however , that at the present time the cumulative surplus in the fund will reach $ 19.3 billion by the end of the year , and $ 26 billion by next year , if contributions remain the same . 
in fact , even if premiums were reduced by one - third , the cumulative surplus will remain $ 19 billion . 
this is far beyond the amount indicated in the 1995 budget , as well as the amount recommended as a surplus by the government actuary , which was $ 12 billion to $ 15 billion , as protection against having to increase premiums during a recession . 
so where is the transparency that Senator Carstairs was talking about , because the government is still maintaining the myth that EI premiums are funding EI benefits , and that it is building up a surplus so that it will not be necessary to increase premiums during the next recession ? 
the government ' s policy has clearly changed , but the government refuses to admit it . 
transparency also has to do with it being possible for Canadians to see what the government is spending and how . 
the present government has been particularly casual in accounting for its spending , preferring to use methods that serve its own purposes rather than conforming to generally accepted accounting principles . 
as part of a series of measures , beginning with the $ 961 million in provisional assistance to Nova Scotia , New Brunswick and Newfoundland so that they could harmonize their provincial sales tax with the GST , the $ 800 million for the Canada Foundation for Innovation , and the most recent example of the $ 2.5 million for the millennium scholarships fund , the government , according to the Auditor General , has violated fundamental accounting principles . 
instead of accounting for expenses when they are incurred , the government has decided to debit the accounts of Canada so as to be sure to generate , over a given period , the fiscal balances it feels are desirable . 
there is still more . 
as a result , the government can say every year that income taxes are not being increased while at the same time benefiting from higher revenues that are accruing solely from inflation . 
Canadians , on the other hand , are seeing the real value of their disposable income decline because of this hidden tax grab . 
the impact on families is quite significant . 
not only are personal income taxes higher as a result of inflation , but the real values of the credits aimed at lower - income families , such as the GST refundable tax credit and the child tax credit , also decline . 
not only is transparency being violated , fairness is being violated as well . 
the government is being inconsistent in its treatment of seniors and lower - income families with children . 
the Old Age Security program and the Canada - Quebec Pension Plans are fully indexed with respect to inflation . 
if it is essential to maintain the standard of living of the elderly , why is the same not true of families with children , especially those with low and modest incomes ? 
as I noted earlier , the impact on families is substantial - very substantial . 
restoring full indexation of the tax system and transfer system , assuming inflation is about 1.5 per cent per year , would add over $ 1 billion to family disposable income in the first year . 
about three quarters of this would come from lower federal taxes and higher federal benefits while the remainder would come from lower provincial taxes . 
the cumulative effect of this partial de - indexation of the tax transfer system is quite substantial . 
by 1995 , the disposable income of Canadian families was reduced by $ 9.5 billion , with $ 6.4 billion of that being due to higher federal taxes and the remainder due to higher provincial taxes . 
furthermore , I point out that this assessment is not just mine . 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has also criticized the policies of the federal government in this regard . 
according to that organization , the federal tax rate in 1998 is 13 per cent higher than it was 10 years earlier , solely because of inflation . 
the most severe effect was felt by those with low incomes . 
this lack of protection against rising prices has pushed 1.4 million individuals onto the tax rolls and has pushed an even larger number , 1.9 million individuals , from the lowest tax bracket to the middle tax bracket . 
six hundred thousand Canadians who were in the middle bracket now find themselves in the highest tax bracket , not because they enjoy a higher standard of living , but because their taxes have been simply increased . 
the partial deindexation of the tax and transfer system was admittedly imposed initially by the Progressive Conservative government in 1995 . 
at that time , the government found itself in a very precarious situation . 
i would remind all Canadians how strongly the Liberal opposition of the day , in this house and in the House of Commons , opposed all these measures . 
i would remind all Canadians how loudly the Liberal opposition opposed the introduction of the GST and how they promised to scrap it . 
however , it is truly inconsistent to argue against the variety of needed measures undertaken during the times of true fiscal crisis and yet continue to impose those measures when they are no longer needed . 
indexation is a case in point ; so are the temporary surtaxes that were introduced to fight the deficit . 
today , with the government budget in balance , those measures are no longer needed , yet the government continues to cling to them . 
the half - hearted reduction in the surtax and the convoluted way in which it is being implemented do not change this . 
this discussion on indexation leads me , moreover , to another point which casts a great deal of light on the government ' s economic approach and the societal costs of that approach . 
for example , it is a secret to no one that overcoming the federal deficit was in large part accomplished by the substantial decrease in Canadian interest rates and the very marked economic growth we have experienced recently . 
the government wants to collect the bulk of the credit for this by claiming it is the result of the financial restraint it has imposed . 
that is true , in part , but it is still more likely that the low interest rates in Canada are a sign of the conviction of foreign investors that Canada is now a low - inflation economy . 
what can we say about the present government ' s support of the efforts undertaken by the Bank of Canada to maintain a low inflation rate ? 
the price stabilization policy was stated for the first time in 1988 by John Crow , governor of the Bank of Canada at the time . 
the Liberal opposition criticized the policy roundly , and unceasingly . 
in 1991 , increasingly low inflation rates were set , and the Bank of Canada ' s price stability policy was associated inexorably with Mr. Crow . 
in addition , the objectives for inflation , which were meant to have gradually decreased , were replaced by a new series of objectives which stabilized at around 1 to 3 per cent . 
it is therefore fair to say that the first act of the present government was to cast doubt on the joint commitment of the government and the Bank of Canada to ensure price stability . 
two other factors helped to create confusion in the public ' s mind about the government ' s desire to ensure price stability , and the ability of the Bank of Canada to pursue such a policy . 
very rapidly , the government revised the 1992 - 93 and 1993 - 94 deficits upward by a substantial amount . 
these deficits , which exceeded $ 40 billion , were completely inconsistent with a monetary policy geared to price stability , and given what we now know about the government ' s propensity for playing with the budget figures , it is entirely possible that these were political , and not budgetary , deficits . 
the second factor was the government ' s decision not to go back to full indexing of the tax system . 
there is a fundamental contradiction between the supposed wish of the government to ensure price stability , on the one hand , and the decision to structure tax and transfer regimes in such a way as to take advantage of inflation . 
the most striking thing about the most recent recession , is not its severity , but the fact that the upturn was weak and hesitant , and never really got off the ground . 
even if the present government was not in power when the economy began to slow down seriously , it was certainly in power during the upturn , and there is no doubt that its policies , coupled with the messages it sent to the financial markets , had a negative impact on that upturn . 
i am firmly convinced that its hesitant commitment to price stability , the unprecedented decision to replace the governor of the Bank of Canada , and the inconsistency of its monetary and budgetary policy were all contributing factors to the weakness of the upturn . 
as a result , we ended up with high unemployment rates and slower progress toward balanced budgets by federal and provincial administrations . 
in addition , having slowed down the economic upturn , the Liberal government found itself forced to take some extremely drastic steps , which impacted negatively on the poorest provinces , particularly those in Atlantic Canada . 
the employment insurance reform , cut - backs in certain regional development programs , such as those administered under the Atlantic Region Freight Assistance Act , and the Maritime Freight Rates Act , as well as the changes to ACOA ' s power to grant subsidies , all had a significant impact on Atlantic Canada . 
not surprisingly , in last June ' s election the Liberal government lost 21 of 32 Atlantic region seats . 
the voters remembered . 
they were not prepared to forget Mr. Chr é tien ' s Liberal government . 
the people of the Atlantic region , like people everywhere else in Canada , have good memories . 
all of this illustrates this present government ' s budgetary policy . 
it is far from being as impressive as the honourable senator suggested in his speech . 
in speaking to this bill , I took the opportunity afforded me by the honourable senator to put the bill within the context of all that took place to achieve the fiscal equilibrium which characterized the federal budget . 
in closing I would like to address briefly one substantive point which took up far too much time when Bill C - 28 was debated in the House of Commons and in the committees . 
i am referring of course to the allegations of conflict of interest that were levelled at the Minister of Finance with respect to changes to the Income Tax Act as they pertain to the taxation of international shipping . 
the Ethics Commissioner absolved the minister of any conflict with respect to this bill , noting that Mr. Martin was isolated from all discussions regarding this amendment to the Income Tax Act . 
indeed , the only complaint the commissioner had with the process was the fact that he was not informed of the matter in advance and that the bill should have been tabled by someone other than the Minister of Finance . 
i do not intend to raise the matter in this chamber as I believe there is no substance to the allegations . 
instead , let us debate in this house and in the committee the contents of Bill C - 28 and the policy context in which it is to be implemented . 
in closing , on the eve of the Prime Minister ' s departure for the G - 8 summit , everyone is predicting that Mr. Chr é tien will be " busting his britches " on the subject of the Canadian miracle . 
he will forget to mention that , in Quebec , 21.2 per cent of the population is living in poverty and that , in Canada , more than one person in five is living below the poverty line . 
Wednesday , Mr. Chr é tien will forget to mention that , in New Brunswick and the Atlantic region , the TAGS program was a failure and real unemployment in northern New Brunswick is over 30 per cent . 
as I was saying at the start of my remarks , the bill currently before us is the product of an old , tired government that advocates a hands - off approach and that is happy to compare itself with developing and less industrialized countries , rather than with the United States . 
in other words , at this point in our history , over 5.2 million Canadians live below the poverty line . 
in this regard , I hope that Minister Pettigrew or one of his colleagues will deign to appear before the committee studying the bill to explain the statement the minister recently made on leaving the House after question period , and I quote : 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I was planning only to address a small portion of Bill C - 28 , which is an omnibus bill that covers many areas . 
i shall only touch upon one part of Bill C - 28 which bothers me . 
for many years , I have been associated with aboriginal affairs and am a member of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
clause 178 ( 1 ) of this bill would change section 149 ( 1 ) ( d ) of the Income Tax Act . 
in the past , any municipally owned corporation or a corporation owned by a local government did not have to pay income tax . 
with this change , if 90 per cent of a business is outside a municipality , then they will have to pay income tax . 
we must now ask why this would affect aboriginal self - government and the aboriginal community . 
in order to answer the question , we must realize that the governments of the last 25 years have come to understand that the population of our native peoples has increased to the extent that their numbers today are probably much larger than when the Europeans first arrived on the continent . 
with that understanding , it is clear that the idea of just restoring reservations or land , or the idea of helping trapping , fishing and farming would not provide enough income in the future for aboriginal self - government . 
aboriginal self - government without some sort of income would lack independence . 
in other words , it would not be self - government and they would have to depend on hand - outs . 
governments of the last generation granted with the land large cash payments or payments over a long period of time . 
of course , this means that aboriginal groups and bands have had to turn to the corporate world to supplement and build the income they feel is necessary for their people to have self - government . 
as we travel around the country , we see that aboriginal peoples have moved into the businesses of airlines , transport , real estate development and many other areas which will provide jobs and income to their people . 
under the Indian Act , a company which calls itself an Indian or a native company will not pay income tax . 
right now , they do not pay income tax . 
however , there is nothing to say that in the future they will not have to pay income tax . 
it may also attract some of the capital and partnerships that they need . 
that is why they like to put their companies under the Income Tax Act . 
that is why the clause I have mentioned is so dangerous from the point of view of self - government of aboriginal people . 
if income tax inspectors and auditors say that native companies are really companies owned by local governments , then they will fall under the Income Tax Act , something which will interfere with their economic future and , therefore , the returns they bring to the band and self - government . 
one can always argue why the Income Tax Act should discriminate as to the ownership of a company . 
the point is that we have discrimination in terms of ownership of companies . 
the Income Tax Act discriminates between an existing line of business and a new business . 
in other words , you cannot write off losses from one line of business against income earned in another . 
that is what we call the sugar bowl theory . 
each company has to have its own set up . 
that is a debate for another day . 
one of the reasons that Americans are supposed to be more entrepreneurial than we are is that they take risks . 
if they lose their shirt in that risk , they can take it out of profit on another one . 
we try to restrict that here , perhaps not justifiably . 
the Income Tax Act now does discriminate in taxation . 
foreigners owning a company will pay a different tax than non - foreigners , and Albertans have a different rate of tax than Quebecers . 
in other words , residence and ownership have been used as a basic formula for income tax . 
some of the native people appearing before the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce will be making that point on this particular issue . 
i hope they will also appear before the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
honourable senators , one loophole could be used in the situation . 
native people could argue that they are not local government , that they are actually government equivalent constitutionally to the provinces . 
however , if you have ever argued with an income tax assessor , you will know that their minds do not actually expand to that constitutional width . 
they will just bore right in when their nose smells money and go after it . 
they collect it first , and you fight to get it back afterwards . 
it is probably a good idea to hit them on the snout before they start sniffing . 
honourable senators , we should make doubly sure that this measure is not a license for income tax people to tax our native - owned or aboriginal companies that are doing all of us a service in trying to make self - government work by becoming independent of the public purse and earning their own money . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill referred to Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare : 
that the Senate endorses and supports the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada ; 
that the Senate for humanitarian reasons urges the Government of Canada and the Governments of the Provinces and of the Territories to comply with these findings and recommendations ; and 
that a copy of this motion be forwarded to each federal , provincial and territorial Minister of Health . - ( 
honourable Senator Carstairs ) . 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , in light of the motion before us , I am compelled to speak on this issue which has been on the forefront of the conscience of Canadians and legislators for the last month and a half . 
the debate about the federal government ' s handling of compensation for the victims of tainted blood has been mired in political rhetoric at the expense of human suffering . 
it is because of my faith and belief in our system that I am driven to make some of the statements that follow . 
responsibility and accountability are periodically shifted between provincial and federal governments . 
as Thomas Walkom from The Toronto Star pointed out in his column last week : 
canada ' s Hepatitis C controversy has degenerated into an emotional wrangle , a battle between nasty and nice . 
those who argue that governments should compensate all who contracted liver disease through infected blood are deemed to be nice . 
those who argue against this are assumed to be nasty . 
what many people and organizations have failed to remember in this bitter debate is that the real issue here is not about who is nice or who is not ; it is about , as Thomas Walkom pointed out , the limits of science . 
who is entitled to compensation and for what ? 
these are questions society grapples with every day . 
who is willing to take responsibility , and who is to take the blame ? 
as Chris Cobb articulated in his article entitled " Who Gets What " on May 6 in The Ottawa Citizen , for the government to proceed in claiming its partial liability of $ 1.1 billion for victims afflicted between 1986 and 1990 , this very action still awaits sanction from the courts . 
in the words of Cobb himself : 
politicians are so busy politicking on Hepatitis C , they ' ve forgotten the rules . 
honourable senators , a number of things have been severely overlooked in regard to this issue . 
first , the process of identifying the victims and indeed others who suffer misfortunes from the health care system is tangled in a myriad of legal nuances and human emotions . 
second , the issue of compensation following directly from the first scenario necessarily falls upon health law and ethics . 
Ottawa , in turn , declares that the provinces are not respecting the basic tenets of medicare . 
where is the liability for patients in federal - provincial arrangements ? 
this debate only exemplifies the urgent need to better define the roles and responsibilities of the two levels of government in this country . 
the squabbling over who picks up the cheque , not just to hepatitis C victims but other compensation issues that inevitably arise through society , can be settled and hopefully avoided in the future after new federal - provincial talks begin . 
that will be the first step in ending this bitter debate and preventing a repeat of the different levels of government passing blame on to each other . 
the current dissent among several provinces and the federation with regard to the nature and method of compensation for victims of hepatitis C invokes a reassessment of the Canada health care system . 
it has been my privilege for the past 40 years to be a part of this system as a doctor , as an academic researcher , and as an administrator . 
all Canadians have a right to receive health care when they need such care . 
when we revisit the Canada Health Act , this establishes five criteria which the provinces must meet in order to properly maintain and receive federal health care funding and initiatives . 
these include public administration , comprehensiveness , universality , portability and accessibility . 
in my years in the medical profession , I have always insisted on a sixth criteria , that is , accountability . 
in order for these principles to be realized , there must be strong and integrated cooperation among the federation and its provinces . 
if the federal government is to have an active and credible role in this matter of liability - one which risks surfacing again - there must be some assumptions in the establishment of federal and provincial roles . 
it must be taken responsibly and humanely , free of political innuendoes and manipulating emotions . 
if the Canadian health care system is to function adequately into the next millennium , we must have a strong national leadership in health promotion , the definition of health , health care delivery and , most important , national resources to deal with situations like the hepatitis C disaster on an ongoing basis . 
we need a national institute of health so that we can stop depending on knowledge being frequently acquired from the United States , and thus competently deal with our own situation . 
the next step is to integrate our resources , establish acceptable standards and outcomes , and move forward . 
otherwise , we and our health care system will eventually succumb to a series of disasters . 
for example , who is responsible for the hundreds of premature deaths from heart disease alone that occur on an ongoing basis ? 
if you step back for a minute , what is really at question here is the debate that once again exemplifies the need to better clarify and define the roles and responsibilities between the two levels of government in this country . 
the squabbling over who picks up the cheque , not just for hepatitis C victims but on other compensation issues that inevitably arise throughout society can be settled , and hopefully avoided in the future , after new federal - provincial talks begin . 
that will be the first step in ending the bitter debate and preventing a repeat of the different levels of government passing the blame on to each other . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to begin this afternoon by thanking Senator Lynch - Staunton for his motion . 
i thank Senators Keon and Kinsella for their interventions . 
i regret , however , that Senator Lynch - Staunton wishes to dispense with his motion so quickly because I believe he has afforded us the opportunity to discuss this matter in a logical and mature fashion . 
there are , honourable senators , no less than 50 recommendations in the Krever report . 
it will take all of us a long time to study and understand those 50 recommendations . 
we can do that because the debate in this chamber has been , to date , so different from the debate in the other place . 
there has not been name calling which , quite frankly , does a disservice not only to the victims of hepatitis C but to all Canadians who are suffering from a wide range of illnesses . 
first , we should expect a system , as Senator Keon so well said , that should be based on the five principles of the Canada Health Act . 
we want a health care system that is universal , has a single payer , is portable , accessible , comprehensive and that is publicly administered . 
that is what we have in Canada today . 
as Canadians , when we are ill and after we have dealt with the health care system , something which may be ongoing , we should be able to depend on our social safety net . 
if we become disabled , we should be able to depend on the Canada Pension Plan . 
if we cannot afford it , we should be able to depend on social housing . 
we should be able to depend on home care and , as a very last resort in that safety net , we should be able to depend on welfare . 
this should be available to all Canadians without question . 
are there gaps ? 
yes , indeed , there are serious gaps in this program that I have laid out . 
we know that in almost all provinces health care is woefully inadequate , and those who are most in need quite frequently do not have access to it . 
we know that pharmacare programs in the provinces vary greatly from province to province . 
is there a federal role ? 
i hope so . 
i am pleased that the government is looking at both aspects of home care and pharmacare . 
senator Keon also raised the issue of whether or not all sick people should be entitled to compensation . 
is hepatitis C a special case ? 
is it a special case for all victims ? 
these are the questions that we senators must examine seriously . 
in making his recommendation for a no - fault compensation system for all hepatitis C victims of tainted blood , Justice Horace Krever challenged us , in my view , to examine the much broader issue of no - fault health insurance . 
this is an important debate for our health care system and one which , in a limited way , I have examined before while in public office . 
i refer to no - fault automobile insurance . 
i must say that I found it severely wanting . 
to deny access to the courts , as does the Manitoba plan , does not provide me with a level of comfort , nor does establishing a schedule for body parts , with little recognition of the intrinsic differences between human beings and their talents and abilities . 
i believe that is quite unfair . 
however , it is a debate worthy of this chamber in the form of an inquiry , or even of the magnitude of a special study . 
like all Canadians , I have enormous compassion for hepatitis C victims who have become victims because of tainted blood . 
some have no symptoms for years , sometimes apparently never . 
we cannot minimize the suffering that hepatitis C victims of tainted blood will suffer . 
honourable senators , I also have enormous compassion for the family who has learned that their child is massively mentally developmentally delayed . 
i have watched those parents struggle to cope with children in the home , children who , decades earlier , would have been institutionalized . 
should we be paying those parents compensation ? 
in many cases , we fail even to provide them with sufficient respite care so that the parents are not in a total state of exhaustion all the time . 
many of you will remember the case of the mother who killed her severely handicapped son and then herself after the Robert Latimer decision . 
why ? 
because she gave up the struggle for help . 
should she have been compensated ? 
would it have made a difference ? 
however , perhaps it is worthy of our study . 
what about the family whose three - year old is diagnosed with leukaemia ? 
should they be compensated for their pain and suffering ? 
should the child who is suffering because of chemo and other therapies be compensated ? 
this is the kind of suffering that brings tears to the eyes of everyone . 
should the young teenager diagnosed with juvenile diabetes who faces a shorter life expectancy and perhaps blindness be compensated ? 
what of the young adult diagnosed with multiple sclerosis who is told that she will have some periods of remission and , if she is lucky , they will be for long terms , but the long - term prognosis is that she will become more and more handicapped and will end her life in a wheelchair and perhaps in an institution ? 
should she be compensated ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
health care provides for that . 
i was talking about hepatitis victims . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I know individuals who have experienced all of the situations I have mentioned . 
the health care system does provide them with supports , as Senator Lynch - Staunton has indicated , but those supports are also there for the victims of hepatitis C . The question , therefore , is who should get compensation . 
should we pay all victims of disease compensation , and with what dollars ? 
surely these dollars should not be taken from an already overburdened health care system . 
if we support such a scheme , we must be speaking about new dollars . 
if they are new dollars , from where do we cut ? 
as with most no - fault insurance schemes , limits on the compensation would be set . 
are we , as a society , prepared to say that this illness is worth more than that illness ; this suffering is worth more than that suffering ? 
that is how the Workers Compensation Board works . 
the worker agrees not to sue , the employer agrees to pay into a fund , and the board administers the moneys . 
however , most boards in this country are , quite frankly , overflowing in red ink . 
is this what we propose for the health care system ? 
i hope not . 
let us look at the particular example of hepatitis C acquired from tainted blood . 
Mr. Justice Horace Krever recommended compensation for all victims , including those for whom the government was probably , in his view , not liable . 
indeed , Mr. Justice Krever says in his report , " I acknowledge the force of argument made by , among others , the Prichard Report , that it is difficult to treat blood - related injury compensation differently from compensation for other health care injuries . " 
he goes on to say , " Given my terms of reference , however , it is not for me here to consider for any injuries other than those that are related to blood therapy . " 
you may ask yourself , honourable senators , " Who exactly was Dr. Prichard ? " 
in 1990 , the federal government , then in the hands of those of the other side , and the provincial governments , were extremely concerned by the rates of medical malpractice insurance for doctors and the number of claims for compensation established by a commission that was chaired by Dr. Robert Pritchard , now the President of the University of Toronto . 
the Prichard Commission was made up of distinguished Canadians , including the then Dean of Medicine at McGill University medical school ; Dr. Richard Bruce , Madam Justice Alyene Picard of the Superior Court of Alberta , who has written a definitive text on hospital and doctor liability ; and Dr. Gregory Stoddard , one of the leading health policy analysts of this country . 
they concluded the following : " We recommend the development of a no - fault compensation scheme for persons suffering significant , avoidable health care injuries . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
Prichard had nothing to do with the Krever Commission . 
senator Carstairs : 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
senator Carstairs : 
senator Lynch - Staunton , I listened to you and did not say a word and I expect the same courtesy from you . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
order . 
senator Carstairs was given the floor to make a speech . 
senator Carstairs : 
further , they said , " The principal inquiry to determine if an event is compensable should be whether , with the benefit of hindsight , the injury could have been avoided by an alternative diagnostic or therapeutic procedure or by performing the procedure differently . " 
they specifically recommended that the same test be applied to those who were injured through the blood system . 
that is exactly , in my view , what the ministers of health have tried to do . 
is it reasonable to assume that those infected prior to 1986 would also pass the avoidable test criteria ? 
in this , honourable senators , there is some disagreement . 
some would argue that tests were available as early as 1981 , and this is true , but surrogate testing first occurred in the United States in February 1986 , and national testing in the United States began shortly after that . 
clearly , it is this example of universal testing in 1986 that those in the Canadian blood system should have responded to , and they did not . 
in 1986 , it became common practice and we chose not to follow it . 
that is why , in my view , liability became the government ' s to except . 
clearly , the tainted blood , and thus hepatitis C which comes from tainted blood , could have been avoided , and it was not . 
so after 1986 , by any criteria , it misses the avoidability test . 
the other significant recommendation , to my view , of the Krever Inquiry , was : 
it is recommended that , without delay , the provinces and territories devise statutory no - fault schemes for compensating persons who suffer serious adverse consequences as a result of the administration of blood components or blood products . 
honourable senators , it is clear that , according to this recommendation of Justice Horace Krever , he considers the responsibility a provincial and a territorial one , and not a federal one . 
Mr. Justice Krever has , in essence , given no responsibility to the federal government at all , and this appears to me patently unfair . 
although health is administered at the provincial level , it is clear that the federal government has both policy , through the Canada Health Act , and a fiduciary duty to the health care system in Canada . 
it is clear from the compensation scheme , which had $ 800 million put aside by the federal government and $ 300 million put aside by the provinces , that the provinces also believed the federal government had a responsibility in this field , despite the recommendations of the Krever Inquiry . 
honourable senators , this is not an easy area of debate . 
clearly , our compassion has to be with those who suffer the effects of having been on the receiving end of hepatitis C as a result of tainted blood , as it is with those suffering from illnesses of other kinds . 
however , in my view , we must move cautiously . 
a dangerous precedent could be set ; dangerous , in my view , to the entire health care system . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
would the Honourable Senator Carstairs take a question ? 
senator Carstairs : 
certainly . 
senator Kinsella : 
could the honourable senator clarify whether it is her position that all those who contracted hepatitis C should be compensated , or only those who contracted it after 1986 ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , it is my personal view that the compensation issue is very complex . 
there were tests available between 1981 and 1986 . 
there was a more definitive test available in 1986 . 
i am not a lawyer . 
i cannot tell you in simple terms the liability of those individuals between 1981 and 1986 . 
i will say , however , that I am delighted that the health ministers are meeting further on this issue . 
they have access to legal counsel , and I await their report . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I must inform the house that the time allowed for the intervention by Senator Carstairs has been exhausted . 
we could , of course , extend the time if there is consent . 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
No. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i am sorry , there is not unanimous consent . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
i believe , in the absence of the Leader of the Government , the deputy leader has unlimited time , or at least 45 minutes , to speak , including comments . 
therefore , I find it rather abrupt that interventions to seek information from her should be cut off so quickly . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , on the same point of order , I do not know whether the leader intends to speak to this issue , but if he does , then he should be afforded the extra , additional time . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am advised that only the Leader of the Government has unlimited time . 
senator Carstairs cannot substitute for his person in this instance . 
that is my advice . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
over decades , Canada built a blood supply system upon which all Canadians came to rely and did not question . 
children in schools , for example , learned about blood donor clinics and of the life - saving concept of blood transfusions . 
politicians were the celebrities , along with other famous Canadians , pictured giving blood . 
we prided ourselves in a " donated " blood supply , not a " purchased " blood supply in the main , and somehow this was taken to mean " good . " 
it went so far as to be taken as a necessity . 
we did so because we believed the blood to be safe , as well as necessary . 
we entered hospitals , signed releases that documented the risks of surgery , but we were never made aware of the risks of the blood supply for hepatitis C in the 1970 s and 1980 s . 
suffice it to say , we did so because of the high trust level of Canadians in their blood supply . 
what caused a Canadian to become a hepatitis C victim from our blood supply ? 
was it genetics or was it personal behaviour or choice ? 
was it because of known or disclosed uncertainties in the procedure or was it bad luck ? 
no , none of these . 
this , I believe , marks the difference between other sufferers within the medical care system as opposed to those we are now discussing under the hepatitis C situation . 
he , therefore , pointed to a course of action system not unlike that taken in some other countries . 
the cost in human tragedy and financial need has been escalated due to the actions of some who would put politics first and people second . 
we know that some tragedies are uniquely borne by families and friends . 
in other tragedies , a town , a village , a city coalesces to help those harmed by some disaster , natural or otherwise . 
we also see , thanks to modern communication , a global community coalescing to help victims of famine , war and human crimes such as the Oklahoma disaster . 
why can Canadians not be allowed to coalesce nationally around a disaster through their leaders ? 
this speaks volumes about our system of government at present . 
it is not legally defined nor a fine science . 
it is all about rebuilding trust in national systems . 
individuals can respond at all levels alone , but it is also important in a democratic society that our governments take leadership when our systems fail . 
when national tragedies or disorders occur , be they natural or manmade , our first thoughts are to empathize with the victims . 
the second response is generally " why , " an analysis of what happened . 
surely fault and legality and liability come second . 
surely with compassion you hear the victims and share their pain and suffering . 
you relate . 
you know it could be you in that vulnerable position . 
in other words , we relate because this is a society that has a sense of community . 
in a democratic society such as ours , governments exercise leadership on behalf of all of us . 
to say we have no money is misleading . 
in other words , it is a question of priority . 
why did Minister Rock then approach the federal - provincial negotiations on this issue as a continuing health funding issue ? 
why did the Prime Minister not lead on this issue of compassion ? 
why did Minister Rock not talk of compassion but of legal responsibilities and consequences ? 
why did the Prime Minister put politics above concerns with the confidence motion ? 
the actions of the government have been covered in detail by the press and others . 
in my opinion , the criticism has been justly deserved . 
the issue of a confidence vote will haunt the Prime Minister , the cabinet and all his members for some time to come . 
a loyal opposition that seems bent on playing courtroom tactics instead of appealing to and reasoning with the government to make a right decision or to question a decision that has been made . 
if compassion and caring were the motives of the official opposition , then why did Maclean ' s magazine on May 11 , 1998 , refer to the Reform Party as busy trotting out hepatitis C sufferers in the House of Commons Visitors Gallery ? 
and why did Maclean ' s go on to refer to Reform strategist Rick Anderson gloatingly saying that the deal has to be reopened . 
" trotting out " and " gloatingly " tell the tale . 
in international negotiations when human rights , humanitarian issues or other just causes are put forward , one does not attack those who ultimately have the power to make decisions . 
one appeals to their higher motives , even with repressive , non - democratic leaders , worrying about such things as face saving and results . 
one looks to win in the ultimate cause , not in the ultimate gain . 
the official opposition may believe that they have won or scored some political points but not first and above all for the victims of hepatitis C . Therefore , I appeal to the senators in this chamber to unite to encourage the government to step back from its position , as have two provincial premiers already , and to embark on a new course of action . 
the suggestion is that the government determine , through a task force with the assistance of the victims , the number of victims and establish a fund for the victims and a process by which their claims can be rightfully processed . 
i appeal to the government to think of the victims and their families and the agony of their uncertain future . 
i appeal to the government to exercise its leadership on behalf of all of us so that people come first , as is contemplated in the Krever report . 
this action must be taken quickly and without further political rhetoric . 
only then should we move on to the broader issues of health care and the federal - provincial debate . 
then the debate on the broader health issues that concern all of us can be conducted , and perhaps all those cases which Senator Carstairs has pointed out might be dealt with in a fair and just way . 
should hepatitis C victims be dealt with as a priority , as a precedent ? 
i say with all my heart , yes . 
this is not a legal issue . 
this is not a health issue . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have one short question before I take the adjournment . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
before you do that , I must advise the house that Senator Andreychuk ' s time for debate has expired . 
the question will be allowed with consent ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Gigant è s : 
No. I would not allow questions for Senator Carstairs ; I will not agree now . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we welcome questions . 
senator Grafstein : 
in light of the concern of my colleagues , I move the adjournment in the name of Senator Joyal . 
on motion of Senator Grafstein , on behalf of Senator Joyal , debate adjourned . 
foreign Affairs 
issuance of Building Permit for New Saudi Arabian Embassy in Ottawa 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I am told that the rules permit me to raise a point of order at any time . 
i would like to inform you that , after a vigorous debate at Ottawa City Hall , the committee that had initially refused to issue a building permit for the new Saudi Arabian embassy has now changed its mind . 
i am glad that representation has been made . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
for the record , I must point out that that is hardly a question of privilege . 
it may be a point of information , but that is an entirely different matter . 
the Senate adjourned to Wednesday , May 13 , 1998 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 61 
Wednesday , May 13 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
national Palliative Care Week 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian War Museum 
report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Tabled 
canada Marine Bill 
report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix 
aboriginal Peoples 
question PERIOD 
health 
liability for Compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C in Federal - Provincial Jurisdiction - Government Position 
fisheries 
origin of Cod Tongues served at Canada House Luncheon in London , England - Government Position 
industry 
failure to Include Financial Services in Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Government Position 
health 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Comments of Prime Minister - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial Health Ministers - Government Position 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial Health Ministers - Comments of Leader of the Government in the Senate 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Date of Availability of Valid Tests - Establishment of Criteria for Eligibility of Coverage - Government Position 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Provision for Costs of Legal Defence in Possible Lawsuit - Government Position 
atomic Energy of Canada Limited 
conduct of Nuclear Tests by India - Enforcement of Agreement with China Following Purchase of CANDU Reactors - Government Position 
business of the Senate 
extension of Question Period 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
heritage Canada 
cut - Backs by Canada Council to Funding of Royal Winnipeg Ballet - Government Position 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV CANADA Contract Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Government Position 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Department of the Environment - Conformity With Alternative Fuels Act 
the Senate 
conduct of Committee Business in Chamber - Point of Order 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Continued 
canada Lands Surveyors Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Order Stands 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Continued 
business of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , May 13 , 1998 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Acting Speaker Eymard G . Corbin in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senator ' S STATEMENT 
national Palliative Care Week 
hon. Th é r è se Lavoie - Roux : 
honourable senators , permit me to share with you some thoughts in recognition of National Palliative Care Week . 
honourable senators , in recent years , health care and issues relating to the end of one ' s life have been and continue to be the subject of many reports by the media and of numerous debates by politicians . 
while palliative care remains , in many respects , a source of concern - and even major concern - it is a concrete reality for those who need such care , and for their families . 
palliative care is the active and compassionate care of people who are seriously ill and dying . 
it is primarily directed towards alleviating suffering , improving quality of life and supporting patients and families as they incur multiple losses . 
it seeks to maintain the comfort and dignity of the person with a terminal illness . 
palliative care " affirms life and regards dying as a normal process ; it neither hastens nor postpones death . " 
its goal is to care and not to cure . 
palliative care promotes principles which I believe are key to the well - being of terminally ill patients and their families . 
it seeks to relieve , or even remove , physical pain which can usually be well controlled when one has the required expertise . 
in so doing , the palliative care team assists the person and his or her family or caregivers in coping with the threats and uncertainties of illness . 
effective communication and other important principles are encouraged by including the patient and family in decisions and through a multi - disciplinary approach . 
in the interest of the privacy of the individual , the patient ' s rights and needs are respected . 
one of the tasks of the team is to spend time with the patient to determine the meaning of his or her needs . 
the first programs were established in Canada in 1975 , and today there are now well over 100 such programs across the country . 
during its hearings , the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide heard many testimonies on the benefits of palliative care and also on the limits of such services in Canada . 
all the witnesses who dealt with the issue expressed their support for palliative care . 
the committee recognized the importance of a health care system that promotes palliative care , and included in its report a number of recommendations to improve palliative care services . 
in short , these recommendations include developing guidelines , improving training for health care professionals , coordinating and developing services , and increasing research . 
the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide was consistently told that palliative care is available to only a small percentage of dying individuals - about 5 per cent at the time - and that its availability is unevenly distributed across Canada . 
availability has increased since , but I imagine to not more than 25 per cent of the affected population . 
the problem of access remains one of the greatest challenges in our ageing society , in an era of great technological development in medicine . 
studies have revealed that the majority of palliative care is available in larger centres and , more specifically , in hospitals and institutions . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senator , I am sorry but I must tell you that your time is up . 
you may carry on with the unanimous consent of the Senate . 
does the honourable senator have leave to continue ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Lavoie - Roux : 
yet many hospital - based palliative care services have experienced reductions over the past few years . 
honourable senators can imagine that , with provincial health budget restrictions , palliative care has been affected across the country , increasing the level of acuity of care required by patients and reducing the staff available to meet their needs . 
at the same time , there has been little reinvestment of resources to support the delivery of community - based services . 
although cost effectiveness is an important reason for shifting the delivery of health care from hospitals to the community , it is more important to give people the choice of maintaining their quality of life in the environment where they are most comfortable , which is very often at home . 
honourable senators should also consider the demographic dimension . 
it is well known that the Canadian population is ageing . 
the proportion of the population over the age of 65 is steadily increasing , from 8 per cent in 1961 to 12 per cent in 1991 . 
this segment of the population is expected to reach 23 per cent by the year 2031 , as the baby boomers reach age 65 . 
even the elderly population is aging . 
between 1995 and 2001 , there will be a 30 - per - cent increase in those aged 65 to 74 , and a 40 - per - cent increase in those aged 75 to 84 . 
the group of people aged 85 and over will actually double in number . 
although palliative care is by no means restricted to the elderly , the vast majority of palliative care services are consumed by older adults . 
due to an aging population , therefore , and to the projected increase in the incidence of cancer and chronic illnesses , a significant increase in the demand for palliative care services is predicted . 
there is concern , however , that in the area of palliative care , demand outstrips supply . 
everyone should have access to skilled and efficient palliative care , regardless of social or geographical situation . 
following on the work of the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide , I can conclude with confidence that palliative care remains one of the most humane solutions for people facing their last days . 
whereas Canadians were divided on the subject of assisted suicide , all witnesses who appeared before us agreed that the government needed to make palliative care a top priority . 
to conclude on a hopeful note , I would simply like to read a letter of acknowledgement from the health minister of the day , Mr. Dingwall , to whom we had written requesting that some of our recommendations be implemented . 
in concluding , the former minister of health , David Dingwall , stated in a letter he sent in November 1996 : 
care and decisions about care at the end of life do indeed touch the lives of all Canadians , and I agree fully that these are priority topics . 
when I recently met with Health Minister Allan Rock , he echoed these sentiments . 
that there be a deepened sense of commitment to palliative care is my hope , and may we , our country ' s leaders , continue to strive towards the development of policies and actions which advance palliative care in Canada . 
it is important , of course , for the patients and their families , but also we must think in terms that if we do not do anything or do not do enough , what kind of problems will we face ? 
we might face problems over which we will not have any control . 
i say to my colleagues on both sides of the chamber that if they are in any position to influence more generosity in terms of the development of palliative care , the whole of society and their fellow citizens will certainly be very grateful to them . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian War Museum 
report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee Tabled 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Murray , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
canada Marine Bill 
report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the seventh report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications on Bill C - 9 , for making the system of Canadian ports competitive , efficient and commercially oriented , providing for the establishing of port authorities and the divesting of certain harbours and ports , for the commercialization of the St. Lawrence Seaway and ferry services and other matters related to maritime trade and transport and amending the Pilotage Act and amending and repealing other Acts as a consequence . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Bacon , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
senator Bacon : 
honourable senators , with the leave of the Senate , I would like to read a letter from the Minister of Transport , Mr. Collenette , and to table it today . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
aboriginal Peoples 
hon. Jean B . Forest : 
honourable senators , I give notice that at the next sitting of the Senate , I shall move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. on May 26 , 1998 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
question PERIOD 
health 
liability for Compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C in Federal - Provincial Jurisdiction - Government Position 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , one of the recurring issues throughout the hepatitis C compensation debate has been the confusing nature of accountability and responsibility to tainted blood victims by the federal and provincial governments . 
as Senator Keon wisely noted yesterday , where is the liability for patients in federal - provincial arrangements ? 
it seems that there is an unequivocal need to better define the overlapping liability and responsibilities of the federal and provincial health portfolios so that in the future such compensation problems can be avoided should such a tragedy ever reoccur . 
over the past couple of months , we have seen the federal and provincial governments at loggerheads with one another rather than joined together in cooperation in order to resolve the issue in a manner equitable to all injured Canadians . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate advise us whether the government will undergo a comprehensive examination of the overlapping levels of federal - provincial jurisdiction in regard to health - related issues , particularly in regard to compensation for those who have been injured by the health care system ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Nolin makes a very interesting point . 
it would be very helpful if we could better define the responsibilities of the federal and provincial health portfolios . 
i shall certainly endeavour to bring the points and questions he has raised to the attention of the Minister of Health and , indeed , to my colleagues in the cabinet . 
fisheries 
origin of Cod Tongues served at Canada House Luncheon in London , England - Government Position 
hon. Orville H . Phillips : 
honourable senators , at a ceremony in London today marking the renovations and refurbishing of Canada House , the Canadian government is serving , among other delicacies , 100 pounds of Canadian cod tongues . 
since cod fishing on the Atlantic coast is closed , might I ask where they obtained the cod tongues ? 
was it from Spain or Portugal ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , let me state categorically that the cod tongues came from Newfoundland . 
also on the menu was smoked Quebec quail , rooster from Charlevoix , Muskoka mushrooms and blueberry tarts , spicy caribou tartare on bannock with Saskatoon berry butter , and fallow venison from the Nicola Valley , with Arctic musk ox from the West Coast . 
the whole of the country was represented . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
all endangered species . 
industry 
failure to Include Financial Services in Interprovincial Trade Agreement - Government Position 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
almost four years ago , on July 18 , 1994 , the Prime Minister signed the agreement on internal trade with his provincial and territorial colleagues . 
unfortunately , he failed to include in that agreement one of the most important sectors of the Canadian economy , namely , financial services . 
in their recent assessment of the agreement on internal trade , the Canadian Chamber of Commerce awarded the government an F , which stands for their failure to liberalize interprovincial trade in financial services . 
will the leader advise what steps the Prime Minister and his government are taking to remove these costly roadblocks that are hurting Canada ' s ability to compete at home and abroad ? 
senator Di Nino : 
good question . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , that is a very good question . 
as indicated earlier in discussing this particular point , removing barriers to interprovincial trade encourages the efficient allocation of resources in our economy and , as such , improves Canada ' s economic potential . 
i lamented with Senator Kelleher yesterday that improvements were not being made at a faster pace . 
however , significant progress has been made towards dismantling barriers to trade within our country . 
the federal , provincial and territorial governments recently reached an agreement on procurement in the so - called MASH sector , which my honourable friend will know covers municipalities , academic institutions , social and health services . 
in addition , substantial progress has been made with respect to government procurement and labour mobility . 
these developments serve as examples of how governments can improve economic union by working together . 
senator Kelleher : 
honourable senators , with the greatest of respect , those who supplied the government leader with his answer did not give him the correct information . 
perhaps the government leader should refer back to the people who prepared the answer for him . 
in any event , as we are all aware , Canada recently signed a multilateral treaty on financial services at the World Trade Organization . 
as Canada ' s former minister for international trade , I commend the government for signing the WTO financial services treaty . 
however , this international success story highlights the failure of the Government of Canada to achieve similar results here at home . 
i would , therefore , like to ask the leader to convey to the Prime Minister a very simple question : 
given the fact that his government has just negotiated a financial services treaty with dozens of foreign countries , why has the Prime Minister failed to reach a similar interprovincial trade agreement here in Canada ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister and all ministers responsible are working diligently towards accomplishing such an agreement , with specific reference to Senator Kelleher ' s legitimate concerns about the financial services sector . 
let me point out that while there is no consensus among economists regarding the exact magnitude of the economic benefits associated with the agreement on internal trade , benefits are considered to be substantial for the economy as a whole and , according to the 1996 Statistics Canada publication , $ 1 billion in internal trade generated 11,800 private sector jobs in the year studied . 
that was a couple of years ago , but relates directly to internal trade . 
health 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Comments of Prime Minister - Government Position 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
during Question Period in the other place on May 5 of this year , the Prime Minister was informed that Premier Bouchard had announced that the Province of Quebec would assist tainted blood victims to the tune of an additional $ 75 million towards the federal - provincial compensation package . 
the Prime Minister ' s response was rather telling . 
the PQ government wants to make sure that Jean Charest ' s Liberal government gets stuck with the bill . 
this week , Ontario Premier Mike Harris pledged $ 200 million to assist those infected by tainted blood . 
referring to both premiers , Prime Minister Chr é tien ' s response was : 
obviously , there are two premiers who are in political trouble at the moment . 
would Senator Graham explain his colleague ' s comments in greater detail ? 
is this the Prime Minister ' s sole concern regarding the Krever commission proposal that all victims of tainted blood be compensated : to avoid being " stuck " with the bill ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not believe that that is the case at all . 
a meeting will be held tomorrow , as all honourable senators know . 
minister Rock has indicated that he will be meeting with the provincial ministers of health to examine the issue of assistance to Canadians infected with hepatitis C through the blood system because some provinces have changed their position . 
obviously , Quebec and Ontario are among those . 
there is a letter from Premier Harris to the Prime Minister , purporting to request a response from the federal government on its position . 
as indicated , Premier Harris has expressed the view that Ontario might be interested in contributing more . 
at the same time , Quebec is on record as indicating that they would contribute $ 75 million more . 
however , other provinces have adopted a wait - and - see attitude , and I feel that we should not attempt to play games in connection with a very important and sensitive issue of concern to all Canadians and , most particularly , to the victims . 
i would urge all honourable senators to fully debate this question . 
i know that there are several honourable senators on this side who want to participate in the debate on the motion introduced by the Leader of the Opposition , some of whom will be doing so today . 
we will await with great interest the outcome of the meetings and the deliberations which will take place tomorrow . 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial Health Ministers - Government Position 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , certain provinces have indeed changed their positions , and I do not envy the Minister of Health having to cope with partners in an agreement who suddenly , for whatever reason , only two months later , revise their positions quite drastically . 
however , going into the meeting tomorrow , what will be the federal government ' s position ? 
will it be to maintain the agreement as is , or is it open to some amendments to it in whatever form ? 
is it to urge its partners and fellow signatories to maintain it as is , or , after the debate which has been going on now for three or four weeks , to realize that perhaps a little more flexibility and openness is needed in its approach to the agreement ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Government of Canada has always been open . 
as a matter of fact , the Government of Canada has provided the leadership on this particular question from the very beginning . 
there are many Johnny - come - latelys in the country , honourable senators , who try to score political points on the backs of hepatitis C victims . 
the Government of Canada has provided leadership from the beginning , both at home and abroad . 
i think it is wise to hear from other provinces . 
for instance , Premier Klein , according to The Globe and Mail of May 7 , said that he is not convinced of the need to beef up the package , but that his health minister will attend the meeting . 
he also indicated , according to the Saskatoon Star Phoenix , that in the event that the offer is revisited , the ministers of health would need to assess " what is going on here " and asked , " Can we work at a deal one more time and make it stick ? " 
premier Filmon of Manitoba indicated on May 5 that during discussions with several first ministers about the issue , he urged that the only way to resolve this issue is to have further meetings of federal and provincial ministers of health . 
as honourable senators can see , there are varying views among provincial ministers . 
the Government of Canada is flexible but we want to know where provinces stand because the Government of Canada took the leadership on this issue . 
there was an agreement , and when the agreement was made , it was understood that all parties would be bound to that agreement . 
however , apparently , the ground has shifted , as several provinces have indicated that change perhaps should be considered . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , the question is not where the provinces stand . 
we know where they stand and we do not need quotations from the minister to waste time in Question Period . 
we want to know where that federal leadership is today and where does the federal government stand on the issue ? 
is the file still closed , " yes " or " no " ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , the file obviously is not closed because , if it were closed , there would not be a meeting tomorrow . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , the file is not closed because the provinces have reopened it , despite what the Minister of Health told us only two weeks ago . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , it would be very difficult for the Minister of Health to state categorically the position of the Government of Canada while he is waiting for the provinces to come up with their position . 
the provinces have changed their position several times . 
we need to find out categorically where the provinces stand . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they told you . 
you just quoted them . 
senator Di Nino : 
listen to the people ! 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , whether the file is opened or closed , we will know shortly , will we not ? 
could the minister indicate whether or not the Minister of Health will go to this meeting carrying the criteria with respect to this additional compensation package , which he might then discuss with the other health ministers ? 
senator Graham : 
i am sure the Minister of Health , as always , knows what he is doing and what his mandate is . 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , my question is supplementary to this matter . 
although I have always felt that in health matters it was the federal government ' s responsibility to provide leadership , as it has always done in matters such as the thalidomide crisis , would it not be helpful for the federal government to know the position of the Senate of Canada with respect to this very important public policy issue ? 
i notice on the Order Paper a motion that has been put there by our leader to the effect that the Senate endorse and support the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada . 
would it not be helpful if we were able to debate this issue in the Senate before the meeting tomorrow so Canadians would know the position of this body , which is respected by many and whose views I think would be held in high regard ? 
would you not agree with that , Mr. Leader ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , there are several honourable senators on this side who want to participate in the debate . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
let us speak tonight , then . 
senator Ghitter : 
in the event that the answer is " yes " and the meeting is held tomorrow , would the leader not agree that it would be useful if we carried on this afternoon and this evening to come to a conclusion on this matter so our view would be known before the meeting starts tomorrow ? 
surely the leader would agree with that . 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , it is wonderful for the Johnnys - come - lately on the other side to try to score political points on this issue whether in the front line on behalf of the Reform Party or in the front line on behalf of Premier Mike Harris , who suddenly somersaulted and came up with something like $ 100 million or $ 200 million that he wanted to put on the table . 
the debate in this place should evolve as it always does . 
senator Ghitter : 
this is not a Johnny - come - lately situation . 
for the Senate of Canada to not deal with this matter as it currently exists , when we can be helpful , merely endorses the view of some Canadians that all we do here is sit around and rubber - stamp things and that we are not leading in any way . 
surely we should be able to debate this issue and present our views before the meeting tomorrow . 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Upcoming Meeting of Minister with Provincial Health Ministers - Comments of Leader of the Government in the Senate 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , as a Quebecer , I feel insulted by the last answer given by the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i would like the reply to be worded differently . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
if Senator Nolin feels offended , then I certainly would withdraw - and apologize for - any comment that he finds offensive . 
however , I would just quote from Premier Bouchard , who called for a meeting of premiers and health ministers of the provinces and territories to reach common ground before meeting with the federal government . 
he also announced that his province will spend an additional $ 75 million to extend compensation to the pre - 1986 victims . 
if I talk about Johnnys - come - lately , then there are some Johnnys - come - lately to this particular proposition , but Premier Bouchard has called for a meeting of the premiers and the health ministers . 
that was his position before . 
senator Nolin : 
Mr. Minister , in the first , unanimous resolution in the National Assembly , they were not talking about money . 
i am talking about the first resolution , followed by a response from your health minister saying that the Qu é b é cois are hypocrites . 
this is the unanimous decision to which I am referring . 
you are talking about the other one , the $ 75 million , and that is why I take exception to what you are saying . 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Date of Availability of Valid Tests - Establishment of Criteria for Eligibility of Coverage - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question also has to do with hepatitis C , specifically the dates . 
much of the debate as to who should be covered by the government ' s $ 1.1 billion hepatitis C compensation package has to do with dates and timing . 
in order to be included in this deal and to avoid seeking compensation through the courts , one would need to have contracted this disease between 1986 and 1990 - in other words , January 1 , 1986 , you are fine ; December 31 , 1985 , you are a cooked goose . 
minister Rock , however , confirmed : 
... there is no question that there were tests available before 1986 . 
some American states had them , some parts of Europe as well . 
this was in the House of Commons Hansard of May 1 , 1998 , page 1155 . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate explain what procedures were followed to ensure the accuracy and equity of using the 1986 start date for coverage eligibility ? 
in other words , would Senator Graham outline the criteria used by his colleagues to verify that no viable testing procedure was available before 1986 ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the period from 1986 to 1990 was used because that is when national surrogate testing was begun . 
the Honourable Senator Stratton says that there were tests available earlier , but there was some question as to the validity of those tests , and indeed whether they would have been valid . 
compensation to Victims of Hepatitis C - Provision for Costs of Legal Defence in Possible Lawsuit - Government Position 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , if I may , if some states in the United States were using them , and if parts of Europe were using them , and if such tests were found to be valid , why would the government at that time or the Red Cross not seek to use them ? 
these fees will be paid out on the backs of the taxpayers . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i hope we can do it on humane and compassionate grounds , and I hope that that will be the way in which we will find the solutions , both tomorrow and in the future . 
senator Stratton : 
are you assuring this place that the file will not be closed again ? 
will the file remain open until this matter is resolved appropriately ? 
senator Graham : 
honourable senators , I think that is a question that is impossible for me , or for Senator Stratton if he were in my position , to answer . 
the Government of Canada is doing the best it can under the circumstances . 
as I said , the provinces have changed their opinions after having reached an agreement among the provinces , the Government of Canada , and indeed the territories . 
i would urge my honourable friends to await the outcome of tomorrow ' s deliberations . 
atomic Energy of Canada Limited 
conduct of Nuclear Tests by India - Enforcement of Agreement with China Following Purchase of CANDU Reactors - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , today India announced that it had conducted two more underground nuclear tests , and President Clinton signed documents imposing punishing sanctions against New Delhi . 
India is attempting to justify its stunning actions on the basis of an atmosphere of distrust in its relations with China , and its belief that its " bitter neighbour , " Pakistan , has received military technology from China . 
in fact , it is reported that Pakistan began building bombs in the early 1970 s , and is now suspected of having a stockpile of some 15 to 25 . 
in its eagerness to sell CANDU reactors , Canada has become a nuclear partner with China . 
even while we were cementing the CANDU deal , Chinese nuclear exports to Pakistan were being documented . 
according to the trade publication Nucleonics Week , the C . I. A . discovered in early 1996 that China had exported technology to Pakistan in relation to enriching uranium to weapons grade , and later it violated its pledge to the United States by further shipments again . 
since 1994 , Canada has had an agreement with the People ' s Republic of China that would allow transfer of any nuclear equipment or technology to any other country only with Canada ' s written consent . 
i want reassurance that we will not repeat the mistake we made with India between 1956 , when we exported technology , and 1974 when India exploded its bomb containing plutonium produced in a Canadian reactor . 
how is Canada enforcing its agreement with China ? 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , safeguards are taken under the International Atomic Energy Agency . 
with respect to the particular incident to which my honourable friend refers , Canada did supply India with two CANDU reactors in the late 1960 s and early 1970 s , but these were not used for the production of that country ' s first nuclear weapon which I believe Senator Spivak indicated was detonated in 1974 . 
it is therefore highly unlikely that Canadian - supplied CANDU reactors were implicated in the testing that was done . 
by way of comment , nuclear energy is a safe , environmentally sound and cost - effective source of energy . 
canada remains prepared , under adequate safeguards , to cooperate with other countries that want to benefit from Canadian expertise in the peaceful use of nuclear energy . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , with all due respect - 
business of the Senate 
extension of Question Period 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should inform the house that the time allotted for Question Period has expired . 
both Senator Spivak and Senator Andreychuk have been standing since yesterday , hoping to be recognized by the Chair . 
would there would be agreement to continue with Question Period ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
leave is not granted . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
there has been agreement on both sides of this chamber that we would try to send our committees off to an early start today . 
provided that Senator Spivak and Senator Andreychuk are the only two questioners , this side would be prepared to hear from them . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is that agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I also want to ask a question . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I think that we can continue with the questions during Question Period tomorrow . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have the response to a question raised in Senate on April 28 , 1998 by Honourable Senator Johnston regarding cut - backs of the Canada Council to the funding of the Royal Winnipeg Ballet ; response to a question raised in Senate on both May 5 and 7 , 1998 , by the Honourable Senator J . Michael Forrestall regarding the rejection by air traffic controllers of NAV CANADA ' s contract offer and the possible threat to safety standards . 
heritage Canada 
cut - Backs by Canada Council to Funding of Royal Winnipeg Ballet - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Janis Johnson on April 28 , 1998 ) 
the Canada Council for the Arts is an independent crown corporation that is entirely responsible for its day - to - day operations , including funding decisions . 
concerns should be directed to Dr. Shirley L . Thomson , Director of the Council . 
attached is the Canada Council for the Arts ' public answer to the Royal Winnipeg Ballet . 
20 April 1998 
in 1997 - 98 , the RWB received an operating grant of $ 970,000 through the Creation / Production in Dance Program of the Canada Council for the Arts . 
a peer assessment committee made up of nine professionals specializing in dance , which collectively reflect a broad range of artistic practice and professional experience in Canada , met in March 1998 to evaluate grant requests for 63 dance organizations across Canada . 
their recommendations were recently approved by the Board of Directors of the Council . 
they based their evaluation on three major criteria ( explained in detail in the guidelines that accompany our application form ) : 
artistic merit , including written assessments over the last three years of the companies ' public performances by specialists who are knowledgeable about and sensitive to the form of dance involved ; artistic merit constitutes two - thirds of the evaluation . 
outreach initiatives , including contributions to the dance milieu and audience development . 
administrative / financial stability . 
other provincial / municipal resources available , 
the projected impact of any reduction on the ability of the applicant to function , 
the projected impact of any reductions on the type of activity , 
the impact of the results in the priority areas specifically identified in the Council ' s Strategic Plan . 
the results of these decisions include increases for certain companies , first - time grants for other companies , no change for some companies and decreases for others . 
the grant to the Royal Winnipeg Ballet has been decreased by 9 % ( to $ 883,000 ) , in keeping with the peer assessment committee ' s recommendations . 
members of the Council ' s Dance Section will be meeting with the company in May to discuss the recent decision in greater detail . 
transport 
rejection by Air Traffic Controllers of NAV CANADA Contract Offer - Possible Threat to Safety Standards - Government Position 
NAV CANADA and the Canadian Air Traffic Control Association ( CATCA ) are currently engaged in collective bargaining . 
members of the Canadian Air Traffic Control Association rejected NAV CANADA ' s proposed contract offer on April 30 , 1998 . 
NAV CANADA has stated that the company is prepared to return to the bargaining table whenever the Canadian Air Traffic Control Association ( CATCA ) is ready , in an effort to continue to try and reach a negotiated settlement in the best interest of both parties . 
we remain confident that the parties will reach a settlement agreeable to both NAV CANADA and the Canadian Air Traffic Control Association within the scope of the bargaining process . 
in the event of any disruption of service in the air navigation system , Transport Canada would heighten monitoring activity and would take any required action to ensure that aviation safety is not compromised . 
answer to Order Paper Question Tabled 
energy - Department of the Environment - Conformity With Alternative Fuels Act 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the answer to Question No. 89 on the Order Paper - by Senator Kenny . 
the Senate 
conduct of Committee Business in Chamber - Point of Order 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Acting Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
this is the second time that a person other than the chairman or the deputy chairman of the Senate standing committee has risen to conduct business before the chamber on behalf of that committee . 
it is my understanding that when the chairman of a committee is absent and the committee wants to bring a matter to the attention of the chamber , the responsibility falls to the deputy chairman . 
senator Johnson is the Deputy Chairman of the Aboriginal Peoples Committee and she sits on this side of the chamber . 
i do not want that point to be lost . 
that is the way we normally proceed , and I would ask that that procedure be respected in the future . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , to briefly respond to that intervention , clearly that is a custom of this place . 
it is not a rule but a custom , that if a chairman is not available , the deputy chairman takes up the responsibility . 
in this instance , Senator Forest told me that it was not anticipated , according to her understanding , that either Senator Watt or Senator Johnson would be in the chamber , and that is why she was bringing forth the notice . 
senator Johnson did in fact enter the chamber in time to make the notice . 
we on this side will continue to try to adhere to the custom as closely as possible . 
hon. Jean B . Forrest : 
honourable senators , I was approached by the clerk of the Aboriginal Peoples Committee who said that he had been unable to reach the chairman , who is out of the province , or the deputy chairman , and asked me to present the notice . 
i said I would do it providing he could not reach the deputy chairman before the Senate convened . 
i have written a note of explanation to Senator Johnson , and that is how it happened . 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Poulin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Forest , for the third reading of Bill S - 2 , An Act to amend the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act and to make a consequential amendment to another Act ; 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Spivak , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cochrane , that the bill be not now read the third time but that it be amended : 
in clause 1 , on page 1 : 
( a ) by adding the following after line 17 : 
" ( 2.1 ) 
the definition of " transportation occurrence " in section 2 of the Act is replaced by the following : 
" transportation occurrence " means an aviation occurrence , a railway occurrence , a marine occurrence , a pipeline occurrence or a highway occurrence . " ; and 
( b ) by adding the following after line 19 : 
( a ) any accident or incident associated with the operation of a truck , and 
( b ) any situation or condition that the Board has reasonable grounds to believe could , if left unattended , induce an accident or incident described in paragraph ( a ) ; " . 
2 . In clause 2 , on page 2 , by adding the following after line 14 : 
" 2.1 Section 3 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection ( 4 ) : 
this Act applies in respect of highway occurrences 
( a ) in Canada , if the occurrence relates to extraprovincial truck transport ; and 
( b ) outside Canada , if Canada is requested to investigate the occurrence by an appropriate authority . " . 
" ( 1.1 ) 
subsection 4 ( 2 ) of the Act is replaced by the following : 
( 2 ) The Governor in Council shall appoint as members persons who , in the opinion of the Governor in Council , are collectively knowledgeable about air , marine , rail , pipeline and highway transportation . " . 
the portion of subsection 6 ( 1 ) of the Act after paragraph ( b ) is replaced by the following : 
and in this subsection , " transportation " means air , marine , rail , pipeline or highway transportation . " . 
" 7 . ( 1 ) 
subsection 10 ( 1 ) of the Act is replaced by the following : 
( 2 ) Each of the four Directors mentioned in paragraph ( 1 ) ( a ) has exclusive authority to direct the conduct of investigations on behalf of the Board under this Act in relation to aviation occurrences , marine occurrences , railway and pipeline occurrences , and highway occurrences , respectively , but 
( a ) the Directors ' authority under this subsection must be exercised in accordance with any policies established under paragraphs 8 ( 1 ) ( b ) and ( c ) ; and 
( b ) the Directors shall report to the Board with respect to their investigations and shall conduct such further investigation as the Board requires under paragraph 8 ( 1 ) ( d ) . " . 
6 . In clause 13 : 
( i ) by adding the following after line 4 : 
" ( b ) where the investigator believes on reasonable grounds that the medical examination of a person who is directly or indirectly involved in the operation of an aircraft , a ship , a rolling stock , a pipeline or a truck is , or may be , relevant to the investigation , by notice in writing signed by the investigator , require the person to submit to a medical examination ; , " and 
( ii ) by adding the following after line 18 : 
" ( 3.1 ) 
paragraph 19 ( 14 ) ( a ) of the Act is replaced by the following : 
( a ) to imply that a thing seized pursuant to subsection ( 1 ) may not be an aircraft , a ship , an item of rolling stock , a pipeline or a truck , or any part thereof ; or " . 
hon. Pierre De Ban é : 
honourable senators , I would like to explain why the amendment proposed by Senator Spivak should not be adopted . 
honourable senators , this amendment , proposed by Senator Spivak , would increase the mandate of the Transportation Safety Board of Canada , the TSB , to include extra - provincial trucking . 
notwithstanding the good intentions behind the proposal , there are several reasons of principle , practicability and procedural fairness why it should not proceed , at least not at this time . 
road fatalities have declined in Canada by more than 40 per cent over the past 20 years while the number of vehicles has doubled . 
another example of cooperation and sharing is seen in the coordination and regulatory harmonization being achieved through the Canadian Council for Motor Transport Administrators , the national federal - provincial road safety coordinating body , which reports to the Council of Transport Ministers . 
surely in such a cooperative environment the proposed amendment would need to be thoroughly discussed with the provinces and territories . 
furthermore , this amendment would create duplication of effort with current provincial activities . 
the federal government has jurisdiction over the safety of extra - provincial commercial vehicle undertakings . 
however , that responsibility is largely delegated to the provinces and territories which also have responsibility for vehicle and driver licensing , road construction , maintenance and traffic rules and enforcement . 
the amendment proposed will also create duplication of effort with current federal activities . 
in the context of program review , an assessment is required of the appropriateness of these new expenditures . 
studies are required on the impact of this amendment on other legislation , as well as on other aspects of the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board , the CTAISB Act , such as privilege provisions for " on - board recordings " and " communication records . " 
there has been broad consultation within government and industry on the changes to the CTAISB Act that are contained in Bill S - 2 . 
honourable senators , in its deliberations on Bill S - 2 , the Senate committee heard proposals for the addition of extra - provincial truck and / or bus transportation to the TSB ' s mandate . 
we saw merit in the proposals , but we also saw a need for federal - provincial discussions , and for discussions with industry and the public . 
the position of the government is that such discussions must take place before the introduction of an amendment such as the one we are now discussing . 
for all those reasons , I submit that we cannot accept this proposed amendment to Bill S - 2 . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , all of the points raised by the previous speaker in his remarks are very reasonable . 
however , the one thing that he did not speak about was the fact that the government ' s own review commission , a commission which was mandated in the original legislation , recommended the exact amendment that I am proposing . 
i presume that for the amount of time that the review was undertaken - it must have been several years , I am not sure exactly how many - they must have consulted with everyone in the industry . 
otherwise , how could this government commission have devised such major recommendations and expansion ? 
my second area of concern is whether or not the senator can reconcile that while road injuries have generally decreased , the increase in the number of huge tractor - trailers has meant that more accidents and injuries related to this kind of vehicular traffic are taking place than with all other kinds of commercial transportation . 
those are two areas upon which I would like some explanation . 
senator De Ban é : 
honourable senators , I have enumerated the reasons why the adoption of an amendment such as that proposed by Senator Spivak would create a series of problems , not only on constitutional , jurisdictional and legal grounds but also because of the fact that road safety in Canada is a shared responsibility . 
in fact , a body exists wherein the federal and provincial governments work together in order to harmonize and implement coherent policies for road safety . 
i do not dispute the argument of the Honourable Senator Spivak that this amendment has been recommended by reputable and competent bodies . 
however , it has not yet been discussed at the level of the council of ministers . 
therefore , there still exists the question of legal and constitutional jurisdiction , in addition to those of implementing policies which have not been discussed by the ministers , of additional resources and of duplication . 
the suggestion of Senator Spivak is definitely worthy of consideration by the council of ministers . 
however , we cannot entertain it at this stage . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , debate adjourned . 
canada Lands Surveyors Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I rise to speak on the motion for second reading of Bill C - 31 , respecting Canada Lands surveyors , that is before us today . 
this proposed legislation will transfer to the Association of Canada Lands Surveyors specific responsibility related to the accreditation , professional standards of conduct , continuing education and skills development of Canada Lands surveyors . 
a Canada Lands surveyor is specially qualified and commissioned to conduct legal surveys on Canada Lands ; lands which the federal government holds and manages in trust for the people of Canada . 
canada Lands include the Northwest and Yukon Territories , Indian reserves , offshore areas of Canada and national parks . 
anyone who requires a legal survey of a boundary of Canada Lands must have the survey made by a Canada Lands surveyor . 
these are all accomplished by Canada Lands surveyors through the office of the Surveyor General of Canada Lands . 
on behalf of the federal government , Canada Lands surveyors are currently making massive and critically important surveys in the Northwest and Yukon Territories . 
several thousand parcels of land involved in aboriginal land interests and claims must be legally surveyed and recorded . 
this survey effort will help to define and shape the legal boundaries of the Canadian north . 
canada Lands surveyors are experts in property rights , land management , land registration and survey systems in use on Canada Lands . 
surveying is a knowledge - based activity and , as such , demands a great deal of education , including lifelong learning on the part of people who seek a commission as a Canada Lands surveyor . 
since 1872 , the Surveyor General of Canada Lands has been responsible for the board of examiners that establishes professional standards and qualifications , sets the examinations and grants commissions as Canada Lands surveyors . 
bill C - 31 will transfer this responsibility to the Association of Canada Lands Surveyors . 
this move is both efficient and appropriate . 
for a number of years at the provincial level , self - governing associations of provincial lands surveyors have been managing the responsibility which we are now proposing to transfer at the federal level to the ACLS . 
the legislation we are discussing today represents some seven or eight years of study , consultation and dialogue with the ACLS , as well as with provincial lands surveyors ' associations and with federal government departments such as Parks Canada and Indian Affairs and Northern Development who make use of the services of Canada Lands surveyors . 
the proposed transfer will be orderly and responsible . 
it is consistent with this government ' s commitment to make government more efficient by turning over appropriate responsibilities to the private sector . 
under Bill C - 31 , the day - to - day management of the examination and accreditation process of the board of examiners will be assumed by the Association of Canada Lands Surveyors . 
the association will also play an enhanced role in the skills development , training and continuing education of Canada Lands surveyors . 
this is a most important role , given the significance of lifelong learning in the knowledge - based society and the new economy . 
the ACLS is undertaking to promote the profession of Canada Lands surveyors in order to ensure that a continuing pool of these professionals is available to provide quick , efficient service at reasonable costs everywhere in Canada . 
bill C - 31 also establishes new provisions and procedures related to discipline and complaints . 
these new provisions significantly improve the current system and will enable the association to investigate complaints and to impose a range of penalties appropriate to the situation . 
this will both protect the public interest and safeguard the professional reputation of Canada Lands surveyors . 
i wish to emphasize that the proposed legislation is carefully designed to maintain and preserve the integrity of the Canada Lands survey system . 
the Surveyor General of Canada Lands will continue to be responsible for the standards of property or legal surveys of Canada Lands . 
likewise , the Surveyor General will continue to be responsible for the standards of survey documentation submitted to the Canada Lands Survey records . 
boundary commissions , descriptions of federal electoral districts and surveys required by native land claims also remain under the jurisdiction of the Surveyor General . 
in summary , the proposed Canada Lands Surveyors Act offers clear benefits to the profession , to the public and to the Government of Canada . 
canada Lands surveyors will be assured that their colleagues have all met and continue to meet the high professional standards of the commission they bear so proudly . 
the Canadian public will have the assurance and protection of a self - governing professional association to which they can turn with any complaints or concerns about the competence of a Canada Lands surveyor . 
as well , because of the enhanced promotion of the profession by the ACLS and its increased efforts in the areas of skills development and continuing education , the government will have at its service a permanent pool of skilled professionals as we shape and define the boundaries of land we hold and manage in trust for the people of Canada . 
on motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton , debate adjourned . 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
consideration of Final Report of Special Committee - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on consideration of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on the Cape Breton Development Corporation , tabled in the Senate on December 15 , 1997 . - ( 
honourable Senator Bryden ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this is a report on the final report of the Special Committee of the Senate on the Cape Breton Development Corporation . 
i simply want to say that I am looking forward very much to the speech from my leader . 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Graham , debate adjourned . 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare : 
that the Senate endorses and supports the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada ; 
that the Senate for humanitarian reasons urges the Government of Canada and the governments of the provinces and territories to comply with these findings and recommendations ; and 
that a copy of this motion be forwarded to each federal , provincial and territorial Minister of Health . - ( 
honourable Senator Joyal , P . C . ) . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , it is an honour and a privilege to participate in this debate on the compensation of hepatitis C victims . 
in his motion , the Leader of the Opposition urges the Government of Canada and the governments of the provinces and territories to approve Justice Krever ' s findings and recommendations . 
we will recall that these findings were released in November 1997 by the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada led by Justice Krever , which took four years to complete its work . 
i would like to read for the benefit of the honourable senators the specific recommendation contained in the Krever report dealing with the matter before us as a result of the motion put forth by Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
i would like to put this on the record because it seems extremely important to me that we refer to the report itself . 
the recommendation in question is in chapter 40 of Justice Krever ' s report . 
it is entitled " The Blood System for the Future , " and under the subheading " Compensation " the report reads : 
it is recommended that , without delay , the provinces and territories devise statutory no - fault schemes for compensating persons who suffer serious , adverse consequences as a result of the administration of blood components or blood products . 
a full discussion of the issue of compensation is found in chapter 39 of the report . 
the provinces and territories of Canada - 
i add , he does not refer to the Government of Canada . 
- should devise statutory no - fault schemes that compensate all blood - injured persons promptly and adequately , so they do not suffer impoverishment or illness without treatment . 
i therefore recommend that , without delay , the provinces and territories devise statutory no - fault schemes for compensating persons who suffer serious adverse consequences as a result of the administration of blood components or blood products . 
i cannot insist too much on the notion that in the mind of Justice Krever the responsibility for a compensation scheme is that of " the provinces and territories of Canada . " 
we know what happened following the publication of the report . 
many provincial health ministers refused that recommendation . 
i should like to remind you that following the initiative of the federal Minister of Health , a discussion in the form of a federal - provincial conference was finally convened . 
a scheme was agreed to , and that is what is being debated today . 
i think those facts should be stated in light of what is consigned in the Krever report . 
when the Leader of the Opposition asks us to endorse the recommendations of Justice Krever , I might agree , but what is being done now is not what Justice Krever has written and has printed in his report . 
it is not that I do not agree with what is going on , but I want to be clear that what was stated in the report is not essentially what has been done since March of this year . 
this first element , I think , should be very clearly stated . 
let me remind my honourable colleagues Senator Beaudoin and Senator Grafstein , who are eminent jurists , that when we find ourselves in a situation similar to that of other countries with the same level of development , we try to see how these other nations have dealt with the issue and tried to find a solution that is fair and equitable . 
the fact is that the United States , the United Kingdom , France , Germany , Japan and Russia all failed to set up a compensation fund . 
victims in these countries must go before the courts . 
Italy is the only one that provided a compensation fund , and that fund is strictly for hemophiliacs with irreversible damage to the liver . 
other industrialized nations such as Australia and New Zealand do not have a compensation plan either . 
a recent reform in New Zealand specifically excluded the victims of hepatitis C . In other words , when those governments in New Zealand had the opportunity to intervene and specifically compensate the victims , they excluded them . 
in Australia , a out - of - court settlement was reached in great secrecy to provide some form of compensation to all the victims who had not already turned to the courts . 
Ireland is the only country with a generous no - fault program that compensates all victims . 
while we are trying to define principles to put our health care system on a basis similar to that of the countries with which we have constant dealings of a social nature , we must understand how our neighbours and friends dealt with this issue . 
the Leader of the Opposition wants to know why people infected before 1986 are not entitled to any compensation , adding that this issue concerns a very large number of Canadians and that the explanations provided so far have all been rejected . 
the Honourable Leader of the Opposition also challenges the so - called legalistic approach used by all governments in Canada to decide to provide financial assistance only to those who were infected with hepatitis C through the blood supply system between 1986 and 1990 . 
one of the most important aspects of the national tainted blood debate is the participation of afflicted individuals in working out the settlement process . 
their involvement has been a key factor and , in fact , the government communicated directly with victims ' representatives in order to determine how the $ 1.1 billion should be spent . 
the government ' s ministers , and in particular the Minister of Health , conducted extensive consultations with representatives of the groups affected by the contaminated blood crisis , as did ministers of other levels of government . 
the viewpoint of those afflicted was taken into consideration throughout the negotiation process and victims ' representatives were kept informed as negotiations progressed . 
representatives of groups such as the Canadian Hemophilia Society and the Hepatitis C Society of Canada met regularly with elected representatives of this house and of the other House , and had an opportunity to make their views known at various stages in the process . 
in the final analysis , the issue of the blood supply system is of much greater concern to the public than federal - provincial relations , partisan politics and political opportunism . 
as the honourable senators are aware , the March 27 announcement concerned a proposed settlement only for the period between 1986 and 1990 , when effective testing was available . 
it differs therefore from the usual approach taken in the development of programs in that the amount of money the government is prepared to put on the table is not intended for a clearly defined program of benefits , but rather is an offer to negotiate a settlement of claims arising from a specific set of circumstances in the past . 
allow me to draw your attention to the importance of three class actions - in British Columbia , Ontario and Quebec - for the period between 1986 and 1990 . 
as we might expect , when the courts are asked to resolve an issue , settlement is always a possibility . 
the government has said clearly that it did not want the applicants in these cases to wait indefinitely for a decision from the courts on their specific request . 
negotiations have already begun with the legal counsel of individuals infected with hepatitis C through the blood system between January 1 , 1986 and July 1 , 1990 . 
in the past , in the area of health , negotiated settlements approved by the courts have frequently been used to resolve complex issues of injury caused by the health system . 
two recent cases come to mind : one involving breast implants and the other pacemakers . 
in both cases , the complex aspects of the injury were negotiated by the representatives of the applicants and those of the defendants . 
in both instances , the settlements were submitted to the courts for their approval as being fair , equitable and reasonable . 
even if court - approved negotiated solutions may not be the ideal solution for all social problems , they do provide fair and reasonable solutions in difficult and confrontational cases . 
in addition to meeting the needs of those infected with hepatitis C because of the tainted blood supply , the government last week supported an opposition motion in the other place which concerned those infected prior to 1986 . 
given the close cooperation between the parties and the participation of the provinces and territories , representatives of the Hepatitis C Society of Canada will be meeting with the ministers of health later this week in order to reopen discussions on the situation of those infected with hepatitis C prior to 1986 - 1990 . 
the Canadian government is firmly resolved to move these negotiations along quickly . 
we are all hoping for a fair and equitable solution to this difficult situation . 
speed , however , does not necessarily guarantee a better solution for victims . 
time must be taken to do things properly within a system as complex as ours , where a number of governments are involved . 
given the complexity of the issue , we all hope that tomorrow , when the Canadian and provincial ministers of health meet , they will able , first of all , to reach a consensus and then , let us hope , to initiate a settlement process that is satisfactory to victims and their families , and in keeping with the way our health institutions operate in Canada . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , as I understand it , the Krever report does say that compensation should be the responsibility of the provinces and territories . 
there is no mention of the federal government , and we know what happened next . 
senator Joyal , do you agree with Justice Krever ' s recommendation that , if compensation is to be paid , only the provinces and territories compensate those people who contracted hepatitis C through the blood supply system ? 
senator Joyal : 
justice Krever assigns this responsibility to the provinces because they are in charge of administering the system . 
however , as you know , in our federal - provincial system , the Canadian government makes certain amounts available to the provinces for specific purposes in the area of health . 
the last budget contained a number of measures regarding research , for instance . 
in this case , the Canadian government offered the provinces $ 800 million as a start until the global amount required to solve the victims ' problems for a given period can be determined . 
as the Honourable Leader of the Government indicated earlier , during question period , a number of provinces , including Ontario , Quebec and British Columbia , have already taken the initiative of making additional amounts available . 
the purpose of tomorrow ' s conference is to get the other provinces , particularly Manitoba and Alberta - two provinces the Honourable Leader of the Opposition knows very well - on board and see how much they can contribute so that those who contracted the disease earlier can receive adequate compensation . 
the Canadian government started by showing its good faith . 
needless to say , tomorrow , the Minister of Health will want to see how receptive all the provinces are in this regard , so that an acceptable solution can be found on the basis of last spring ' s agreement between the provinces and the Canadian government . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i must inform the house that Senator Joyal ' s time is up . 
the honourable senator can continue with unanimous consent . 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I rise today to offer my endorsement of the motion put forth by the Leader of the Opposition regarding the Krever inquiry and compensation for the victims of the tainted blood affair . 
before I give you my personal comments , I would like to put on the record the letter that Ontario Premier Mike Harris sent on May 12 to the Right Honourable Jean Chr é tien , Prime Minister of Canada . 
dear Prime Minister : 
one week ago I wrote to you and outlined Ontario ' s position : namely , that Ontarians infected with the Hepatitis C virus through the blood system prior to 1986 should be treated in the same manner as those infected between 1986 and 1990 . 
in that letter , I urged the federal government to make the same commitment to pre - 1986 victims as Ontario ' s government had made . 
our commitment was made in the spirit of Justice Krever ' s report , which states : " Compensating some needy sufferers and not others cannot , in my opinion , be justified . " 
while you have not replied to my letter , your government has commented on this issue in the House of Commons . 
do you believe it is fair to treat someone infected on December 31 , 1985 , differently than someone infected on January 1 , 1986 ? 
or do you agree with Ontario that pre - 1986 victims should be treated the same as 1986 - 1990 victims ? 
in fairness to the victims who are still waiting for assistance , your government should disclose its position on these fundamental questions before the health ministers meet on May 14 . 
your government ' s commitment will ensure that this meeting can be about " how " to compensate victims , not about " whether " all victims are treated equally . 
on behalf of victims , their families , and all Canadians who want their governments to do the right thing , I look forward to receiving your position . 
it is signed by Michael D . Harris , Premier of Ontario . 
honourable senators , to me this issue is about values - Canadian values - which these days are too often missing from our public policy . 
those many thousands of innocent Canadians presently suffering from hepatitis C as a result of the problems in the blood system deserve both our support and our compassion . 
they deserve our support because many of them have been poorly treated by a government more intent on limiting damages than on securing justice . 
they deserve our compassion because they are unwitting victims of a tragic combination of errors . 
this combination of errors has resulted in untold thousands of people being infected with a crippling liver disease in what is arguably one of the gravest public health tragedies in our history . 
in response to this tragedy , the Health Minister told the victims , in effect , that they could take what he was offering and , if they did not like it , they could sue the federal government . 
the entire Liberal caucus applauded and lined up behind him to vote their support . 
the people of this country do not agree with the government ' s high - handed approach to this issue . 
the issue here is not about culpability but about fairness and justice . 
the Health Minister belatedly realized this and since then he has been busy back - pedalling his way up and down the aisles of the other place . 
i must say it has been interesting and instructive for me to watch the Health Minister struggle and squirm as the Prime Minister and his other cabinet colleagues have sat silently by and watched him and his hubris twist in the wind . 
the Health Minister ' s performance reminded me of a wonderful little Quebec phrase : 
il se d é battait comme un diable dans l ' eau b é nite . 
the government ' s cold , clinical approach to this human tragedy struck a very sensitive chord . 
as with the Liberals flinty and grudging apology to former prime minister Mulroney for the Airbus libel , their slander of the hundreds of honest Canadians associated with the Pearson development deal , and their refusal to allow the Somalia inquiry to reach its ultimate conclusion , people were reminded yet again of this government ' s basic lack of humanity and its " it ' s my way or the highway " approach to dealing with the average Canadian . 
they realize that " This file is closed " is not only a phrase , it is an attitude and approach to governance that has come increasingly to characterize this government . 
sadly , this time there are no winners , and there will be no winners until the Liberal Party modernizes its vocabulary by replacing words like " file , " " dossier " and " reference " with " people , " " citizens " and " human beings . " 
honourable senators , the late Martin Luther King once said that the ultimate measure of a person is not where he or she stands in moments of comfort and convenience , but where they stand in times of challenge and controversy . 
this is such a time . 
it behooves all of us , Conservatives and Liberals alike , to stand forth to be counted and to support this motion . 
through no fault of their own , they are now sick and they are now suffering . 
many of them will die . 
the government has agreed to the idea of compensation and good for them . 
it should fully live up to that agreement . 
it should stop splitting hairs . 
the health minister should swallow his pride , get together with the provinces and , as clearly requested by the vast majority of Canadians from coast to coast , come up with a workable , humanitarian solution to this issue as soon as possible . 
honourable senators , I and my colleagues on this side of the chamber strongly believe that the opinion of the Senate is not only valuable but also one which Canadians would commend to the health ministers ' meeting tomorrow . 
therefore , it is incumbent on us to complete debate on this motion today in order that we may convey the voice of all senators to those attending tomorrow ' s deliberations . 
Canadians deserve nothing less . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , it was not too clear as I was listening to the honourable senator reading Premier Harris ' s letter , has Premier Harris agreed to Recommendation No. 1 in the Krever commission report ? 
senator Di Nino : 
i cannot speak for Premier Harris . 
his letter does not address that . 
i would imagine that is an issue which will arise tomorrow at the health ministers ' conference . 
i have no authority to speak on his behalf . 
senator Grafstein : 
your leader is asking us to approve that recommendation which is essentially a direction to the province of Ontario to fulfil Recommendation No. 1 which , as was pointed out by Senator Joyal , is essentially asking the province to establish a statutory no - fault scheme . 
is Mr. Harris prepared to accept a statutory no - fault scheme for the question of compensation to hepatitis C victims before or after those cogent dates ? 
senator Di Nino : 
frankly , Senator Grafstein , what does it matter ? 
what do we care what Premier Harris thinks about that issue ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
oh ! Oh ! 
senator Di Nino : 
may I answer the question ? 
the whole point here is that the Senate is debating a recommendation to the Government of Canada and to the provinces of this country to adopt the Krever inquiry report . 
it is our opinion that that recommendation is most important today , and not the opinions of others . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
then why did you quote Premier Harris ? 
senator Di Nino : 
i quoted the letter for the purposes of the record , as I said , so they can refer to it . 
the issue here is what message we , as members of the Senate , want to send to Mr. Rock and his colleagues , the ministers of health from across this country , about how this issue should be addressed . 
that is the issue . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , the dossier has remained open and it will continue to be open until all provinces and the federal government come to a consensus agreement . 
if a file or a section of a particular file was foreclosed , the dossier remains open . 
i am trying to deal with the resolution because Senator Di Nino has asked us to give it serious consideration . 
your resolution , in the first part , requests that the Senate endorse and support the findings and recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry on the Blood System in Canada . 
as a result of Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s speech last week , I for the first time tried to get through the Krever report . 
to my surprise , I found that the debate had centred around Recommendation No. 1 , but there has been no discussion at all in this chamber from your side about the other 49 recommendations , which are quite complex and quite difficult . 
as a matter of fact , yesterday - and I do not want to take this out of context - I asked Senator Keon whether the Canadian Medical Association had accepted the recommendations in the report dealing with the question of doctors ' responsibilities ? 
he told me that the Canadian Medical Association is divided on some of the recommendations . 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons in Ontario is also divided on those recommendations . 
this is not to say that we might take a position one way or the other , but I do not understand how the honourable senator can ask this side to deal with these 50 recommendations without at least having a fulsome debate from his side , as the proponents of this particular resolution . 
senator Di Nino : 
our leader has said repeatedly that we are prepared to stay as long as it takes , today and tomorrow , to debate this issue so we can hear not only from our side but from the honourable senator ' s side as well , and that we would welcome . 
second , we are really talking about two fundamental issues . 
one is compensation to those who have been infected through no fault of their own , regardless of when that happened . 
that is an issue which is a slam - dunk in my opinion . 
we are also talking about the improvement of the blood supply system which is the focus of the other recommendations . 
if honourable senators opposite have a problem specifically with any one of them , we would love to hear them debate it in this chamber . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
senator Di Nino ' s time has expired . 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
i move that the debate be adjourned . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
senator Bacon has moved adjournment of the debate . 
is it your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
No. 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
would all those in favour of the motion please say yea ? 
hon. Senators : 
yea . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
would all those opposed please say nay ? 
hon. Senators : 
nay . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
in my opinion , the yeas have it . 
call in the senators . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
can the whips indicate to the Chair whether there is an agreement on the time for ringing the bells ? 
the bells will ring for 15 minutes . 
call in the senators . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , the question is on the motion of the Honourable Senator Bacon , seconded by the Honourable Senator Joyal , that further debate be adjourned . 
motion agreed to and debate adjourned on the following division : 
yeas 
the Honourable Senators 
nays 
the Honourable Senators 
the Honourable Senators 
nil 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I declare the motion carried . 
business of the Senate 
hon. Sharon Carstairs ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , if there is a will from the other side , perhaps we could permit all other items on the Order Paper to stand until tomorrow . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
1 st Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 137 , Issue 62 
Thursday , May 14 , 1998 
the Honourable Eymard G . Corbin , Acting Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
health 
hiring of Former Parti Qu é b é cois Candidate as Administrator of Ottawa Hospital 
the Economy 
report on Growth of Business on Prince Edward Island 
the Senate 
comments of Leader of Government 
indebtedness in Developing Countries 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
agriculture and Forestry 
study of Present State and Future of Forestry - Report of Committee Requesting Authorization to Engage Services and to Travel Presented and Printed as Appendix 
report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
nineteenth Report of Committee Tabled 
adjournment 
national Revenue 
treatment of Taxpayers - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
industry 
agreement on Internal Trade - Failure to Cover Procurement in the MASH Sector - Request for Tabling of Agreement 
health 
federal - Provincial Compensation Package for Victims of Hepatitis C - Comments of Minister - Government Position 
foreign Affairs 
reaction of Government to Nuclear Testing by India - Contrast in Reaction with United States Government - Government Position 
reaction of Government to Nuclear Testing by India - Contrast to Reaction to Similar Testing by France and China - Government Position 
citizenship and Immigration 
statement of Minister Regarding Citizenship of Children Born in Canada to Non - Canadian Parents - Government Position 
privy Council Office 
investigation of Unauthorized Disclosure of Cabinet Confidences by RCMP - Government Position 
health 
addition of Caffeine to Soft Drinks - Government Position 
staffing and Strengthening of New Federal Laboratories for Human and Animal Health - Government Position 
answers to Order Paper Questions Tabled 
energy - Freshwater Fish Marketing Board - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
energy - Department of Fisheries and Oceans - Conformity with Alternative Fuels Act 
orders OF THE DAY 
Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Continued 
canada Marine Bill 
third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
tobacco Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
Canadian War Museum 
consideration of Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee - Debate Concluded 
Canadian Wheat Board Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Presented and Printed as Appendix and Adopted 
third Reading 
veterans Health Care Services 
consideration of Interim Report of Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee - Debated Adjourned 
health 
commission of Inquiry on the Blood System , in Canada - Compliance with Recommendations - Motion in Amendment - Debate Adjourned 
motion in Amendment 
the Holocaust 
statement Issued by Vatican Viewed as Teaching Document - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone 
aboriginal Peoples 
the SENATE 
Thursday , May 14 , 1998 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Acting Speaker , Eymard G . Corbin , in the Chair . 
prayers . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
health 
hiring of Former Parti Qu é b é cois Candidate as Administrator of Ottawa Hospital 
hon. Philippe Deane Gigant è s : 
honourable senators , something disgraceful is going on in Ottawa , and it should stop . 
i am talking about the controversy surrounding the appointment of David Levine as CEO of the new Ottawa hospital . 
there are people in Ottawa who have openly opposed the appointment because he has a P é quiste background . 
p é quistes do the same thing , but we are not like them . 
we should not ape the misguided actions of a separatist government that inquires into a person ' s political beliefs before hiring him . 
i once told a candidate that she had won a job competition . 
she replied " But , senator , did you know I was a separatist ? " 
she said she would , and I told her she had the job . 
she was loyal , too . 
that is the Canadian reality , the Canadian ideal . 
it is shameful to attack someone because of their political beliefs . 
the Economy 
report on Growth of Business on Prince Edward Island 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
in their report , they highlight the fact that along with Alberta and British Columbia , Prince Edward Island has the strongest net rate of new business starts in the 1990 s . 
much of the good growth they foresee is related to Confederation Bridge . 
however , the bridge , in the context of the report , is but a symbol for the global links that are being made and which must be maintained given what is happening on the economic front around the world . 
they offer four themes that I personally support to serve as a basis for building the Island ' s prosperity - trade readiness , skills readiness , business capabilities and fiscal responsibility . 
in 1995 and 1996 , when I was a member of Team Canada , I had the opportunity to see how important to our development are the links we have made as a country . 
the emphasis being placed on knowledge - based industries was one that was particularly striking . 
as the report points out , we are linked ever more closely with other peoples , cultures and economies and we must be prepared for the challenges ahead . 
now that we are improving links to the world and the rest of Canada , I would invite everyone to come and view these developments in action . 
the summer is a particularly beautiful time of the year to visit the Island . 
honourable senators , there is much more to do and see on Prince Edward Island than the marvels of this new business growth . 
last year , 1 million people discovered the beauty of Prince Edward Island as a tourist destination . 
this year , we expect 1.4 million people . 
i invite all my honourable colleagues here and in the other place , as well as the good people of Canada , to enjoy our renowned hospitality this summer . 
the Senate 
comments of Leader of Government 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , on May 12 , 1998 , Senator Ferretti Barth brought to our attention the very tragic incident that occurred in Italy in which many lives were lost . 
she made a very moving statement with which I associate , as I am sure do all colleagues on both sides of this chamber . 
i regret that . 
i wanted to bring to his attention that , in my opinion , his comments were inappropriate , particularly coming from a colleague who is held in such high esteem on both sides of this chamber . 
indebtedness in Developing Countries 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
in 1996 the debt of developing countries was US $ 1.5 trillion . 
many countries are paying more than 20 per cent of their gross national product just to service their share of that debt . 
the International Monetary Fund counted 41 countries that were " heavily in debt . " 
of those 41 countries , some 32 are in Africa , in the sub - Saharan area . 
( 14 l 0 ) 
in some parts of the world , no amount of belt - tightening can realistically be expected to solve the debt problem . 
on the contrary , the growth that is required to start paying off these debts can only be expected if there is a massive investment in human , physical and social capital . 
there is a potential here , though , for a win - win solution for both debtors and debt holders , remembering that Canada is not only an exporter of materials but an exporter of capital . 
industrial countries export an ever greater percentage of their products to developing markets . 
obviously , therefore , prosperous economies in the developing world would be of benefit to Canadian businesses . 
as with many other things in life , we can do the right thing and make small sacrifices now or we can live with the consequences of inaction and pay large costs later . 
second , we must ensure that developing countries borrow under the best terms possible . 
the governments of such developing countries must be able to call on experts who are independent of both the political process and of international lending organizations . 
in other words , honourable senators , they need the economic expertise , the " buy forwards " and all the other gimmicks that are used , and advice on what currencies should be paid back , not to mention a system to help control their debt . 
