debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 1 
Tuesday , October 12 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
thirty - Sixth Parliament Opening of Second Session 
communication from Governor General ' s Secretary 
business of the Senate 
new Senator 
introduction 
second Sitting 
speech from the Throne 
railways Bill 
first Reading 
speech from the Throne 
consideration at Next Sitting 
committee of Selection 
appointment 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , October 12 , 1999 
thirty - Sixth Parliament Opening of Second Session 
parliament having been summoned by Proclamation to meet this day for the dispatch of business : 
the Senate met at 11:30 a.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
communication from Governor General ' s Secretary 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a communication had been received from the Secretary to the Governor General , as follows : 
October 8 , 1999 
Mr. Speaker , 
secretary to the Governor General 
the Honourable 
the Speaker of the Senate 
business of the Senate 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I would like to point out that there is no interpretation this morning . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , that is true . 
is there a way to overcome this problem , because each of the speakers will otherwise have to use both official languages ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , unfortunately , this is not possible , since this afternoon we will have the Speech from the Throne , and the chairs have neither earphones nor microphones . 
we can certainly ask everyone to speak in both official languages . 
senator Nolin : 
i am prepared to do so . 
new Senator 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to inform the Senate that the Clerk has received a certificate from the Registrar General of Canada showing that J . Bernard Boudreau , P . C . , has been summoned to the Senate . 
introduction 
the Hon. the Speaker having informed the Senate that there was a senator without , waiting to be introduced : 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau , of Halifax , Nova Scotia , introduced between Hon. B . Alasdair Graham , P . C . and Hon. John B . Stewart . 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that the honourable senator named above had made and subscribed the declaration of qualification required by the Constitution Act , 1867 , in the presence of the Clerk of the Senate , the Commissioner appointed to receive and witness the said declaration . 
the Senate adjourned until 2:30 p.m. 
second Sitting 
the Senate met at 2:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
as there is no business before the Senate , is it your pleasure , honourable senators , that the Senate do now adjourn during pleasure to await the arrival of Her Excellency the Governor General ? 
the Senate adjourned during pleasure . 
speech from the Throne 
at 2:45 p.m. Her Excellency the Governor General proceeded to the Senate Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne . 
her Excellency was pleased to command the attendance of the House of Commons , and , that House being come , with their Speaker , Her Excellency was then pleased to open the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament of Canada with the following speech : 
honourable Members of the Senate , 
members of the House of Commons , 
ladies and Gentlemen : 
it is an honour for me , today , to open this Second Session of the Thirty - Sixth Parliament of Canada . 
i am very aware of the sacrifices that so many of you make in your personal and professional lives in accepting the challenges of public office . 
the commitment you have made is one that I share , and I look forward to working with you over the next five years in the service of the people of Canada . 
today , the representatives of the Canadian people gather to open the session of Parliament that will carry the country into the new millennium . 
we stand before a new century confident in the promise of Canada for our children and grandchildren . 
technology is altering every aspect of our lives . 
knowledge and creativity are now the driving force in a new economy . 
and collaboration is becoming more essential as the issues facing our diverse society grow in their complexity . 
but Canadians will succeed in this changing world , just as we have succeeded throughout our country ' s history . 
the promise of Canada was born in an age when countries were forged through war or revolution . 
our nation ' s founders chose a unique path , which has become the Canadian way - creating a country dedicated to peace , order and good government for all its citizens . 
it took foresight and commitment to break the mould of the nation - state founded on a single language , culture or religion . 
that foresight and commitment have been greatly rewarded . 
canada began as a small colony with little industry and no role of its own in global affairs . 
over generations , individual Canadians built a better future for their families and their communities . 
Canadians and their governments overcame barriers of distance and a harsh northern climate to build a national railway , a system of highways , a postal service , and national cultural institutions , as well as hospitals , universities , and other institutions . 
Canadians and their governments also put in place a modern social safety net . 
together , these achievements have provided the foundation for our quality of life . 
within a few generations , we evolved into an independent nation with an advanced industrialized economy and a voice in the councils of the world : the United Nations , the G - 8 , the Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development , NATO , and many others . 
but whenever tyranny has threatened peace and security , Canadians have never hesitated to answer the call . 
together with our proud Canadian veterans , we remember those who paid with their lives at Vimy Ridge , on Juno Beach , and at Hill 355 in Korea . 
in the tradition of the coureurs des bois , we have explored the frontiers of science . 
from the invention of newsprint to the creation of advanced computer languages , Canadian ingenuity has helped to build the information age . 
from the discovery of insulin to the earliest pacemaker , Canadians have given new life to millions around the world . 
canada was a pioneer in the peaceful use of space , becoming a leader in satellite communications and remote - sensing technologies . 
today , our astronauts are using Canadian technology to help assemble the International Space Station - the largest scientific project in history . 
in a complex world , diverse approaches , skills and ideas are essential to building a higher quality of life . 
canada is a bilingual country in which both men and women of many different cultures , races and religions participate in economic , social and political life . 
our diversity is a source of strength and creativity , making us modern and forward - looking . 
our actions and our history make us at home in a world of change and increasing interdependence . 
our human talent , our values and our commitment to working together will secure Canada ' s leadership in the knowledge - based economy . 
today , Canadians can look with pride on Canada ' s success . 
we have a dynamic economy , a strong and democratic society , and a sense of community . 
we are recognized throughout the world for our quality of life . 
we will build a higher quality of life for all Canadians - for our children , ourselves , and our neighbours . 
a Strong and United Canada 
a high quality of life for Canadians and a strong , united Canada are inseparable . 
the Government will continue to take a comprehensive approach to strengthening the unity of our country . 
all its actions will serve to strengthen Canada by enhancing the quality of life of Canadians . 
our federal system allows us to value the different strengths of each region of our country . 
it guarantees all citizens equal rights and freedoms . 
and it enables Canada ' s wealth to be shared by all citizens no matter where they live - from Newfoundland in the east , to British Columbia in the west , to our newest territory , Nunavut , in the north . 
over the last two Parliaments , Canadians have built a foundation for even greater success . 
our artists , writers , musicians and filmmakers draw admiration from around the world . 
and Canada itself earns the respect of the community of nations as a symbol of peace , democracy and compassion . 
the best way to achieve the promise of Canada for every citizen is to work together to build the highest quality of life for all Canadians . 
but there are some who would pull us apart rather than bring us together . 
even though Quebecers do not want a third referendum , the Government of Quebec continues to talk about holding another one . 
the Government of Canada therefore reaffirms the commitment it has made to Quebecers and all other Canadians that the principle of clarity , as set out by the Supreme Court of Canada , will be respected . 
this requires national will , national strategies and partnerships across the country . 
citizens and governments must collaboratively build an even stronger and more united Canada , a Canada that remains an example to the world . 
Canadians expect their national government to focus on areas where it can and must make a difference . 
and they want this done in the Canadian way - working together , balancing individual and government action , and listening to citizens . 
Canadians expect their Government to be fiscally prudent , to reduce the debt burden , to cut taxes , and to pursue the policies necessary for a strong society . 
the emerging global marketplace offers an enormous opportunity to create more Canadian jobs , more Canadian growth and more Canadian influence in the world . 
achieving a higher quality of life requires a comprehensive strategy to accelerate the transition to the knowledge - based economy , promote our interests and project our values in the world . 
together , we will strive for excellence . 
this demands that we collaborate with our partners to : 
- develop our children and youth , our leaders for the 21 st century ; 
- build a dynamic economy ; 
- strengthen health and quality care for Canadians ; 
- ensure the quality of our environment ; 
- build stronger communities ; 
- strengthen the relationship with Canada ' s Aboriginal peoples ; and 
- advance Canada ' s place in the world . 
children and Youth : 
our Leaders for the 21 st Century 
our Children 
because of the changing nature of the world economy , the prospects for a high quality of life in any country will depend - as never before - on having a population that is adaptable , resilient and ready to learn throughout life . 
the foundation for this is laid in the very early years . 
no commitment we make today will be more important for the long - term prosperity and well - being of our society than the commitment to invest our efforts in very young children . 
parents and families have the primary responsibility for the care of their children . 
but all of society must work together to ensure that our children develop the abilities to succeed . 
the Government will extend and make more accessible Employment Insurance benefits for parental leave , to help parents take more time from work to spend with their children . 
it will make its own workplace policies and those of federally regulated employers more family friendly . 
through further tax relief , it will put more dollars in the hands of families with children . 
and , with its provincial and territorial partners , it will work to reform family law and strengthen supports provided to families to ensure that , in cases of separation or divorce , the needs and best interests of children come first . 
federal , provincial and territorial governments are developing together the National Children ' s Agenda . 
as part of this work , it is the Government ' s objective to reach an agreement among governments by December 2000 on a national action plan to further support parents and families . 
this plan will be consistent with the Social Union Framework Agreement . 
it will set out common principles , objectives and fiscal parameters for all governments to increase resources and further strengthen supports for early childhood development . 
to make it easier for families to break the cycle of poverty , the federal , provincial and territorial governments also established the National Child Benefit . 
the Government of Canada is already investing an additional $ 1.7 billion annually in low - income families with children , while the provinces and territories are investing in complementary services . 
the Government wants no family to have to choose between a job and benefits for their children . 
therefore , by 2002 , the Government will make a third significant investment in the National Child Benefit , while seeking a commitment from its provincial and territorial partners to increase their investment in services for families with children . 
young Canadians 
young Canadians are the leaders of tomorrow . 
already , they are at home in the wired world . 
they have energy , ideas and technological savvy , and they want to contribute to building their country in the 21 st century . 
in our global and connected world , young Canadians are acquiring knowledge and skills at an earlier age . 
the Government will focus on providing young people with more opportunities to connect to the Canadian experience , to view their country in all its splendour , to gain a first - hand understanding of the different regions , and to be challenged by what they learn from their fellow citizens across this land . 
the Government will : 
- draw on the expertise of young Canadians to help connect rural and urban communities to the information highway , by hiring them to put in place additional Internet access sites for public use ; 
- create a single - window service - Exchanges Canada - to give 100,000 young Canadians every year the chance to learn about another part of the country ; 
- ensure that younger Canadians - from age 13 - are given an opportunity to apply their creative abilities , by providing them with a chance to produce their " first works " using traditional approaches and new technologies in the arts , cultural , digital and other industries ; 
- actively engage tens of thousands of young Canadian volunteers to participate in community and national environmental projects and to help others improve their literacy skills ; and 
- enable young Canadians to apply their energy and talents overseas , by participating in international internship programs and helping developing countries get connected to the Internet . 
in addition , the Government will continue to place a priority on providing young Canadians with career information , access to work experience , and learning opportunities . 
a Dynamic Economy for the 21 st Century 
in the global , knowledge - based economy , the advantage goes to countries that are innovative , have high levels of productivity , quickly adopt the latest technology , invest in skills development for their citizens , and seek out new opportunities around the world . 
Canadians have built a strong and dynamic economy . 
it is the cornerstone of our quality of life - providing Canada with the means to continue building a more equitable society , a healthier population , and stronger communities . 
in the space of only a few years , our nation ' s finances have gone from deficits and debt to balanced budgets , with low inflation and low interest rates . 
laws and regulations have been modernized and the role of government in business decisions has been reduced . 
the Government will continue to build a better environment for economic growth and enhanced productivity by reducing the debt burden , cutting taxes , and making strategic investments . 
such investments will help small businesses grow , encourage trade , support citizens in developing the skills they need , and ensure that Canada has modern infrastructure . 
the Government is committed to prudent fiscal management . 
it will never let the nation ' s finances get out of control again . 
it will keep the ratio of debt to GDP on a permanent downward track . 
it will deliver on the commitment it made at the beginning of this Parliament to devote half the budget surplus to debt repayment and tax relief , and the other half to investments that address the social and economic needs of Canadians . 
tax reduction is a key component of a strategy to increase individual incomes and to ensure an economy that produces the growth and wealth which enable those public and private investments necessary for a high quality of life . 
in its next budget , the Government will set out a multi - year plan for further tax reduction . 
increased Trade and Investment 
canada ' s economy is more open than any of the leading industrialized countries . 
we are blessed with a population that comes from countries all over the world . 
foreign markets for our goods and services provide us with new opportunities . 
foreign investment provides us with capital , new ideas , new technologies , and innovative business practices . 
to build on Canada ' s advantage , the Government will increase its trade promotion in strategic sectors with high export potential - sectors ranging from biotechnology and environmental and information technology to tourism , culture and health . 
it will also continue to support innovation and the development of new technologies in leading export sectors such as agriculture , agri - food and natural resources . 
it will launch Investment Team Canada - a co - ordinated effort by all governments and the private sector to make the international community more aware of the unique opportunities for investment and growth in Canada . 
the Government will also modernize legislation to make it easier for global corporations to locate their headquarters in Canada . 
in addition , the Government will work with its partners in the hemisphere toward the establishment of the Free Trade Area of the Americas by 2005 . 
skills and Knowledge for the 21 st Century 
a skilled workforce and a capacity to innovate continuously are crucial building blocks of a successful 21 st century economy . 
over the last three years , the Government has put in place a strategy to build on Canada ' s advantage as the country with the most highly educated workforce in the world . 
it has made it easier to save for a child ' s education . 
it will make college and university more affordable through Canada Millennium Scholarships . 
it has improved student debt relief and provided better tax assistance to finance lifelong learning . 
we will continue to build on this strategy . 
the Government will forge partnerships with other governments , public - and private - sector organizations , and Canadian men and women to establish a national action plan on skills and learning for the 21 st century . 
this plan will focus on lifelong learning , address the challenge of poor literacy among adults , and provide citizens with the information they need to make good decisions about developing their skills . 
over the next two years , the Government will work with its partners to : 
- make it easier for Canadians to finance lifelong learning ; and 
- provide a single window to Canada - wide information about labour markets , skills requirements and training opportunities - on the Internet , over the telephone or in person in communities across the country . 
to ensure that the Public Service of Canada remains a strong , representative , professional and non - partisan national institution that provides Canadians the highest quality service into the 21 st century , the Government will also focus on the recruitment , retention and continuous learning of a skilled federal workforce . 
infrastructure for the 21 st Century 
achieving this objective will require new types of infrastructure . 
knowledge Infrastructure 
improving Canada ' s knowledge infrastructure means supporting a new generation of leaders , attracting the best researchers , and encouraging our graduates to put their talents to work here at home . 
the Government will introduce the legislation necessary to create the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . 
these institutes will provide a model for world - leading research , bringing together for the first time all the researchers who have an impact on health to undertake shared research priorities . 
this innovative approach recognizes the importance of collaborative research for improving the health and well - being of Canadians and for building a high - quality health system . 
the Government of Canada has for many years been one of the most important contributors to research at Canadian universities . 
in the last two years , the Government has pursued an ambitious agenda to improve its support for advanced research in Canada . 
to build on this agenda , the Government will : 
- increase its support to the Granting Councils , enabling them to forge new partnerships with our universities to attract the best research minds in the world through an innovative program of 21 st Century Chairs for Research Excellence ; 
- foster greater international research collaboration by Canadian universities and institutes and expand Canadian expertise in such areas as genomics , climate change , and advanced engineering ; and 
- find new markets for new products and services developed through research by universities and government research centres . 
the Government will also ensure that it has a modern and effective research and science capacity to promote the health , safety and economic well - being of Canadians . 
information Infrastructure 
improving Canada ' s information infrastructure will support the exchange of ideas and the conduct of business over computer networks , connect Canadians to the information highway , and accelerate the adoption of electronic commerce . 
the Government will : 
- take steps to make Canada a centre of excellence for electronic commerce and encourage its use throughout the economy ; 
- re - introduce legislation to protect personal and business information in the digital world and to recognize electronic signatures ; and 
the Government will become a model user of information technology and the Internet . 
we will build on a pilot project now under way to make www . access . ca 
our knowledge - based economy is more than high - tech companies . 
it is an economy in which all sectors strive to use leading technologies and processes . 
indeed , it is an economy in which technology can lead to greater economic stability for the primarily rural regions in which cyclical resource industries - agriculture , fisheries , forestry , mining and tourism - are the dominant sources of wealth . 
the Government will encourage the development and adoption of new technologies in all sectors . 
cultural Infrastructure 
the strength of Canada is reflected in its rich diversity . 
across this country , Canada ' s culture comes alive through our writers , singers and performers , through our filmmakers and artists , and through those who chronicle our history and preserve our heritage . 
it will put collections from the National Archives , National Library and other key institutions on - line . 
physical Infrastructure 
canada must also continue to improve its physical infrastructure for the 21 st century . 
to increase trade and economic growth , we must ensure that we have the capacity to move people and goods safely and efficiently . 
to maintain the quality of life in our cities and rural communities , we must ensure that we have clean air and water . 
the Government will work with other levels of government and the private sector to reach - by the end of the year 2000 - agreement on a five - year plan for improving physical infrastructure in urban and rural regions across the country . 
health and Quality Care for Canadians 
good health and quality care are essential to the well - being of all Canadians and are part of our strength in today ' s global marketplace . 
advances in technology , research and information are opening tremendous new opportunities for improving the health and well - being of citizens . 
Canadians expect their governments to work together to ensure that Canada ' s health care system is modern and sustainable . 
the Government recently reaffirmed its commitment to medicare by investing an additional $ 11.5 billion to modernize the health system for the beginning of the 21 st century . 
the Government will continue to move forward with its provincial and territorial partners and the health care community on common priorities . 
with its partners , the Government will support the testing of innovations in integrated service delivery in areas such as home care and pharmacare , working toward a health system in which all parts operate seamlessly . 
a modern health information system will give health professionals and individual citizens improved access to up - to - date information about health issues and treatment options . 
the Government will ensure that citizens in every region of the country have access to such information so they can make better - informed decisions . 
the Government will protect the health of Canadians by strengthening Canada ' s food safety program , by taking further action on environmental health issues , including the potential health risks presented by pesticides , and by modernizing overall health protection for a changing world . 
we will also continue to address the serious health problems in Aboriginal communities , supporting their efforts to promote wellness and to strengthen the delivery of health services . 
the Quality of Our Environment 
the long - term economic and social well - being of every Canadian depends on the state of our natural environment . 
canada ' s ability to adopt innovative environmental practices and technologies will increasingly be part of Canada ' s strength in the 21 st century . 
Canadians have long recognized the underlying relationship between a healthy environment and a high quality of life . 
Canadians and leading businesses are already working in their own communities to preserve the natural environment , pushing the frontiers and opportunities of environmental technologies and new eco - efficient practices . 
the quality of the environment in our communities is also linked to the environmental health of other communities around the world . 
problems such as climate change and dangerous levels of persistent toxins can be resolved only through concerted international action . 
within Canada , the Government will work with other governments and citizens to meet our country ' s commitment under the Kyoto Protocol to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . 
it will set and enforce tough pollution standards , in particular to better protect the health of children , seniors and residents of the North . 
it will place greater emphasis on sustainable development in government decision making . 
it will also address the structural weaknesses that have been identified in the management of toxic substances . 
internationally , Canada will provide technical assistance to developing countries in adopting sustainable practices . 
the Government will introduce legislation and stewardship programs , working with provinces and territories to ensure that species at risk and their critical natural habitat are protected . 
the Government will also continue to extend Canada ' s national parks system . 
in its own operations , the Government will make itself a model of environmental excellence . 
it will do more to clean up contaminated federal sites . 
it will strengthen its capacity for conducting environmental science research . 
it will also explore new environmental clean - up technologies . 
the Government will report regularly on the results achieved in addressing the top environmental concerns of Canadians . 
building Stronger Communities 
working Together 
our history has been one of Canadians helping Canadians to seize opportunities and rise to challenges . 
this commitment to working together - by Canadians , their governments and their communities - will ensure Canada ' s continued success in addressing the complex issues of the 21 st century . 
it also commits governments to eliminating barriers that unjustifiably impede the mobility of citizens within Canada . 
these barriers include rules that prevent some citizens from obtaining recognition of their qualifications when they move to another province , that deny some students use of their student loans when they study out - of - province , and that restrict access to essential services for some citizens - including those with disabilities - because of their province of origin . 
the Government of Canada is committed to working together with its partners to meet the deadlines set out in the Social Union Framework Agreement , thereby removing all unjustifiable barriers to mobility no later than 2002 . 
in 2001 , Canadians will mark the International Year of Volunteers - a time to celebrate the achievements of Canada ' s everyday heroes . 
the Government recognizes the need to build partnerships with communities and to renew its relationship with the voluntary organizations that serve and sustain them . 
the Government will enter into a national accord with the voluntary sector , laying a new foundation for active partnership with voluntary organizations in the service of Canadians . 
strong communities depend on the participation of all their members . 
to this end , the Government will pursue its efforts with other governments , the private and voluntary sectors , and all citizens to build communities in which Canadians with disabilities are fully included and in which new Canadians feel more at home . 
in addition , the Government will continue working with its partners in all sectors to address the root causes of homelessness and help communities respond to their members ' needs for shelter and other support . 
promoting Safer Communities 
Canadians are justifiably proud of having built communities where citizens feel safe . 
this is a key component of our quality of life and a contributor to Canada ' s comparative advantage . 
the Government will work with Canadians to ensure that our communities continue to be safe . 
its focus will be balanced , combining prevention and a community - centred approach with action to deal with serious crime . 
it will expand the community - based crime prevention strategy and re - introduce legislation to reform the youth justice system . 
the Government will combat drug trafficking while helping communities aid those most affected . 
it will also launch a program of restorative justice to help victims overcome the trauma of crime and provide non - violent offenders with a chance to help repair the damage caused by their actions . 
the Government will focus attention on new and emerging threats to Canadians and their neighbours around the world . 
it will work to combat criminal activity that is becoming increasingly global in scope , including money laundering , terrorism , and the smuggling of people , drugs and guns . 
the Government will strengthen the capacity of the RCMP and other agencies to address threats to public security in Canada and work with enforcement agencies in other countries . 
in addition , it will work to modernize legislation to better ensure public security . 
the Government of Canada will also continue to work closely with the Government of the United States to modernize our shared border for the 21 st century . 
a Stronger Relationship with Canada ' s Aboriginal Peoples 
the contribution of Canada ' s Aboriginal peoples has shaped our country ' s heritage and will continue to enrich Canada in the new century . 
the Government will continue to build on the strong foundation of reconciliation and renewal created by Gathering Strength - Canada ' s Aboriginal Action Plan . 
we are now building stronger partnerships with Aboriginal people - concentrating on improving their living conditions and , increasingly , on strengthening their economies . 
as a result , Aboriginal people will be able to more fully participate in and contribute to Canada ' s economic development and social well - being . 
fostering good government and strong accountability in First Nations communities will increase investor confidence , support economic partnerships , and improve living conditions . 
land claim agreements , in particular , are essential to create certainty for Aboriginal people and their surrounding communities - providing the climate needed for partnerships , investments and economic opportunities . 
early in the new session of Parliament , the Government will introduce legislation to implement the historic agreement with the Nisga ' a . 
canada ' s Place in the World 
as we move into the 21 st century , Canada has the momentum to lead the way toward a safer and more secure world . 
Canadians have built the highest quality of life in the world by focussing on the needs of people . 
we have the expertise to advance an agenda of human security - protecting people from threats to their rights , their safety and their lives . 
we have a reputation internationally for making a difference - through our contribution to eliminating landmines , our work with NATO and the United Nations in Kosovo , our development assistance to Asia and Africa , our efforts to establish the International Criminal Court , and our work to renew the international financial system . 
Canadians recognize that their quality of life depends in part on the quality of life of their neighbours - those who share this planet with us . 
a world where people are secure is a world where fewer people are forced to flee their homes , where there is less crime and terrorism , and where there is a reduced threat of disease and pollution . 
the Government will give increased prominence to human security in its foreign policy , working to achieve meaningful progress in the councils of the world on a global human security agenda . 
in 2001 , the United Nations General Assembly will hold a special session on children . 
in the spirit of partnership that led to the historic treaty banning landmines , the Government will work to reach key international agreements to protect the rights of children . 
canada will champion efforts to eliminate the exploitation of children , including the use of child soldiers in armed conflict , and will help address the crisis of children affected by the HIV / AIDS epidemic . 
the Government will act with like - minded countries to reform and strengthen international institutions such as the United Nations , International Monetary Fund , World Bank and World Trade Organization . 
it will also work to develop a new approach internationally to support the diversity of cultural expression in countries around the world . 
to advance Canada ' s leadership in the Arctic region , the Government will outline a foreign policy for the North that enhances co - operation , helps protect the environment , promotes trade and investment , and supports the security of the region ' s people . 
the Government will increase international development assistance and work in innovative ways to enable poor countries to improve the quality of life of their citizens . 
the Government will also continue to ensure that the Canadian Forces have the capacity to support Canada ' s role in building a more secure world and will further develop the capacity of Canadians to help ensure peace and security in foreign lands . 
honouring Canada ' s Promise for the 21 st Century 
as we prepare to celebrate the turn of the millennium , we can look to our past with pride and to our future with confidence . 
like previous generations , we will face new challenges . 
but guided by our values and our collective experience , we can ensure that Canada remains the best place in the world in which to live - the best place to raise children , to learn , to pursue opportunity , to share in rich , diverse and safe communities , and to admire the beauty of nature . 
all Canadians - every citizen , every government , every business and every community organization - have a part to play . 
we will build the 21 st century together . 
members of the House of Commons : 
you will be asked to appropriate the funds required to carry out the services and expenditures authorized by Parliament . 
honourable Members of the Senate and 
members of the House of Commons : 
as the representatives of the Canadian people across this great land , yours is a special duty - a higher responsibility to strive for excellence in the service of your country . 
let the Canadians of tomorrow look upon this Parliament and say , Here were men and women committed to building a stronger Canada and a better quality of life for their children and grandchildren . 
may Divine Providence guide you in your deliberations . 
the House of Commons withdrew . 
her Excellency the Governor General was pleased to retire . 
the sitting of the Senate was resumed . 
railways Bill 
first Reading 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) presented Bill S - 1 , relating to railways . 
bill read first time . 
speech from the Throne 
consideration at Next Sitting 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Senators : 
dispense . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this Speech be taken into consideration ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) moved : 
that the Speech of Her Excellency the Governor General , delivered this day from the Throne to the two Houses of Parliament , be taken into consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
motion agreed to . 
committee of Selection 
appointment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) moved : 
that pursuant to rule 85 ( 1 ) , the Honourable Senators Atkins , Austin , DeWare , Fairbairn , Grafstein , Kinsella , Kirby , Mercier , and Murray be appointed a Committee of Selection to nominate ( a ) a Senator to preside as Speaker pro tempore ; and ( b ) the Senators to serve on the several select committees during the present Session ; and to report with all convenient speed the names of the Senators so nominated . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it you pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
No. 
motion agreed to , on division . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 2 
Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Governor General 
addresses at Installation Printed as Appendix 
the Honourable J . Bernard Boudreau , P . C . 
tributes on Appointment to the Senate 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
YWCA Week Without Violence 
the Senate 
congratulations to Staff for Efforts in Preparing for Installation of Governor General and Speech from the Throne 
agriculture 
industrial Hemp - Obstacles in Exporting to the United States 
questions of Privilege 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
committee of Selection 
first Report Presented 
second Report Presented 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
first Reading 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Refer to Committee the Order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Air Canada 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study the Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
la Francophonie Summit 
notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
possible Projects to Help Miners Qualify for Early Retirement Incentive Program - Government Position 
the Environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites 
national Defence 
the Environment 
principles of Payment by Polluters , Pollution Prevention and Phasing out of Toxic Chemicals - Position of Leader of the Government 
agriculture 
efficacy of Programs for Problems Faced by Farmers 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study the Consequences of the European Monetary Union 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Adjourned 
adjournment 
questions of Privilege 
speaker ' s Ruling 
referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
speaker ' s Ruling 
referred to Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
addresses at Installation Printed as Appendix 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move : 
that the Address of the Prime Minister of Canada , the Right Honourable Jean Chr é tien , P . C . , at the Installation of the Right Honourable Adrienne Clarkson , as Governor General of Canada on October 7 , 1999 , together with the reply of Her Excellency the Governor General thereto , be printed as an Appendix to the Journals of the Senate of this day and form part of the permanent records of this house . 
motion agreed to . 
( for text of addresses see Appendix , p . 37 . 
) 
the Honourable J . Bernard Boudreau , P . C . 
tributes on Appointment to the Senate 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham : 
honourable senators , on June 11 , 1997 , I was sworn to the Privy Council of Canada as Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
on that occasion , I said that my prime objective was to help create conditions wherein I would be replaced at the first opportunity . 
in fact , I stated publicly that I would be the only person around the federal cabinet table trying to work himself out of a job . 
there are not many politicians who can boast that they have achieved their goal and have accomplished their task in half the normal time allotted . 
senator Boudreau is not only a long - time personal friend , but a long - time family friend as well . 
in fact , when Bernie ran for the leadership of our party in Nova Scotia , one of my sons was his campaign manager . 
for the last two years , Senator Boudreau and Jack have been partners in the same law firm . 
i wonder , honourable senators , if it would be too much of a stretch of imagination to suggest that where the son failed , the father succeeded , in a rather circuitous fashion , in advancing Senator Boudreau ' s political career . 
however , Senator Boudreau is well able to speak for himself and stand on his own merits . 
both in his private and public careers , he has earned the respect of many Canadians , whether they live in Nova Scotia or elsewhere . 
before and after his years in the Nova Scotia legislature , Senator Boudreau enjoyed a distinguished career in the practice of law , both in Sydney and Halifax . 
as Minister of Finance and later as Minister of Health , he found it necessary - as was the case in all the provinces and indeed in the country - to make some very tough decisions . 
senator Boudreau , you will come to understand , as I did , that it is a high honour and a rare privilege to sit in Canada ' s cabinet and to freely discuss the burning issues of the day , be they of a regional , national , or international nature . 
Permeating all of these discussions will be our common concern for the welfare of the people in our beloved Nova Scotia . 
as regional minister , you will be faced with many challenges , and in these , as well as other matters which will concern you as Leader of the Government in the Senate , you will have my full cooperation and support . 
in this chamber , you will find some of the finest minds and most dedicated parliamentarians in the world . 
it has been my experience that our colleagues bring very special qualities , unique experiences , successful careers , and a wonderful work ethic to the challenges they face . 
in my view , they share the sentiments of Edward Blake , a former member of Parliament who , more than a century ago in a speech delivered in the House of Commons , said : 
the privileges of Parliament are the privileges of the people , and the rights of Parliament are the rights of the people . 
as we enter a new century , these words remind us of a tradition which we have inherited - an unchanged tradition - and a privilege very few of us are fortunate enough to possess . 
that is the wonderful privilege of public service . 
what we do here , we do for the people of our province , of our region , and of our country . 
in my 27 years of full - time service in the Senate , every piece of legislation that was amended needed to be amended and , as a consequence , was improved . 
every study undertaken has enriched in some way special segments of our society . 
we are privileged to have you among us and , once again , we bid you the warmest of welcomes . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , while it is always a pleasure on behalf of the opposition to welcome a new member of the Senate , I always do so on the assumption that we will all benefit from a newcomer ' s experience and background until the mandatory retirement age forces departure . 
senator Boudreau is the first senator who , even before being sworn in , announced that his length of stay here will be no longer than the duration of what is left of the present government ' s mandate . 
this puts me in a quandary . 
i want to wish Senator Boudreau a lengthy and rewarding stay here , but at the same time , I , along with many others , hope that this government ' s time left in office is as short as possible . 
actually , I like to think that , after only a few months , the senator will find that the work done here is more productive and less partisan than in the other place , and that he may well want to reassess his decision , once the next election is called , to downgrade . 
only time will tell . 
meanwhile , he takes on a difficult challenge , made more so by the standards set by his immediate predecessor , whose urbanity and civility were never more tested nor better confirmed than they were in the past few days and in his remarks today . 
today , let me simply say that I wish Senator Boudreau well in his new responsibilities , and I congratulate him on the choice of his deputy leader . 
senator Hays is widely respected on all sides and brings to his new position 15 years of active participation in the work of the Senate . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
YWCA Week Without Violence 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I rise today to draw the attention of honourable senators to the fact that next week , October 17 to 23 , is the YWCA ' s Week Without Violence . 
this is an international campaign that was created first by the YWCA in the United States in 1995 , but quickly spread to over 20 countries , including Canada , Australia , Ghana , Uruguay , and Zimbabwe . 
the main objective of the campaign is to emphasize alternatives to all kinds of violence . 
during the YWCA Week Without Violence , YWCAs and YMCA - YWCAs in communities across the country will collaborate with schools , police forces , community groups and sponsors to organize a variety of grassroots activities that encourage Canadians to find solutions to violence they face in their everyday lives . 
each of the seven days of this week will address a different violence - related theme . 
on October 18 , parents and children will learn how to avoid violent situations . 
October 19 is the day on which they will concentrate on making our schools safer . 
Wednesday , October 20 will be dedicated to confronting violence against women . 
on Thursday , October 21 , the YWCA will encourage all Canadians to raise their awareness of how anger , aggression and stress affect men ' s lives and relationships . 
the focus for Friday , October 22 is racism and hate crimes and their impact on violence . 
finally , Saturday , October 23 will highlight how we can replace violence with positive activities , such as sports , art and recreation . 
honourable senators , I encourage each and every one of you to become involved . 
the Senate 
congratulations to Staff for Efforts in Preparing for Installation of Governor General and Speech from the Throne 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , recently , two events took place in this chamber which were very significant in the life of our country . 
having gone through a number of installations and Speeches from the Throne , I have never seen either of those events done better . 
this was her first such event , and I think she distinguished herself . 
in addition , through Black Rod , I wish to pay tribute to her staff and the staff of the Senate who I know burned the midnight oil in looking after all the details and ensured that the functions were carried out in such an excellent manner . 
agriculture 
industrial Hemp - Obstacles in Exporting to the United States 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I rise today to direct the attention of the Senate to the current situation facing a Canadian company and a young Canadian industry . 
Kenex Limited of Chatham , Ontario , is becoming a leading producer and processor of industrial hemp . 
however , this has been recently severely compromised by the U.S. Customs Service and Drug Enforcement Administration . 
i became aware of the problem after I wrote to several of my industrial hemp contacts in September , inquiring on this year ' s crop . 
the response I received from Mr. Jean Laprise , President of Kenex , was not what I had hoped to hear . 
Mr. Laprise was of great assistance to me when I first became involved with industrial hemp legislation . 
at that time , it became obvious to me that the U.S. market was a strong reason for permitting the farming of industrial hemp in Canada . 
despite having a huge market for raw and finished hemp products , the U.S. long ago prohibited the farming of hemp , so the American market for years has been dependent on overseas imports . 
more recently , several states have passed legislation encouraging hemp as an industrial crop - Hawaii , North Dakota and Minnesota among them . 
once manufacturers gain market share , they tend to keep that initial advantage , so it behooves our Canadian producers and manufacturers to gain and entrench their market share before the Americans get going . 
the U.S. market accounts for 95 per cent of Kenex ' s business . 
one of its clients , a $ 2 - billion - a - year company , has been using hemp seed from China in their mixes for years . 
Kenex ' s shipment of birdseed to this company in August was seized by American Customs . 
the shipment was accompanied by documentation verifying its sterilization and THC analysis . 
the birdseed is " sterilized hemp grain , " which is not a controlled substance , regardless of THC content . 
that aside , the Kenex hemp seed is fully legal under Canadian law . 
it has less than 0.001 per cent , or 1 part in 100,000 , of THC . 
Canadian law allows for up to 0.3 per cent in sterilized seed . 
Mr. Laprise said : 
THC traces cannot be found in our products unless the laboratory has the capabilities of testing for THC in parts per million and , even at that level of testing , THC traces cannot be found in most of our products . 
Cynthia H . Thielen , a Representative for the State of Hawaii , has publicly come out in support of Kenex Limited and has openly criticized the American Drug Enforcement Administration ' s involvement in the seizure of Kenex ' s products . 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade is working on the situation , and I will be monitoring the developments very closely . 
i hope to hear some good news for Canadian farmers very soon . 
questions of Privilege 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I rise today pursuant to rule 43 ( 7 ) of the Rules of the Senate of Canada to give notice that I will raise a question of privilege concerning the unauthorized release of working drafts of a report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
you will note that this same question of privilege was raised in the last session . 
a ruling was made by our Speaker , and the matter was to be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
i am resurrecting it as a result of the prorogation , and I wish to speak to it at the appropriate time . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a question of privilege relating to the experiences incurred by a witness who appeared before one of our Senate standing committees . 
at the appropriate time today , pursuant to rule 43 ( 7 ) , I shall speak in detail on the matter . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to direct your attention to the presence in the gallery of a delegation from the Democratic People ' s Republic of Korea . 
Mr. Cha Jong is Bureau Executive of the Institute of International Affairs ; Mr. Li Song Man is Researcher at the Institute of International Studies ; and Mr. Ri Kwang Nam is First Secretary at the Permanent Mission of the Democratic People ' s Republic of Korea to the United Nations . 
the delegation is hosted by our colleague the Honourable Senator Marcel Prud ' homme , P . C . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
committee of Selection 
first Report Presented 
hon. L é once Mercier , Chairman of the Committee of Selection , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 
the Committee of Selection has the honour to present its 
first REPORT 
pursuant to rule 85 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Rules of the Senate , your committee submits herewith the list of Senators nominated by it to serve on the following standing committee : 
standing COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION 
the Honourable Senators , Adams , Bacon , * Boudreau ( or Hays ) , Callbeck , Finestone , Forrestall , Johnson , Kirby , LeBreton , * Lynch - Staunton ( or Kinsella ) , Perrault , Poulin , Roberge and Spivak . 
* ex officio members 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Mercier : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I move that this report be now adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
No. 
on motion of Senator Mercier , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting on the Senate . 
second Report Presented 
hon. L é once Mercier , Chairman of the Committee of Selection , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 
the Committee of Selection has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
pursuant to rule 85 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Rules of the Senate , your committee submits herewith the list of Senators nominated by it to serve on the following standing committee : 
standing COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
the Honourable Senators Andreychuk , Atkins , Bolduc , * Boudreau ( or Hays ) , Carney , Corbin , De Ban é , Di Nino , Grafstein , Lewis , Losier - Cool , * Lynch - Staunton ( or Kinsella ) , Stewart and Stollery . 
* ex officio members 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Mercier : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I move that this report be now adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
No. 
on motion of Senator Mercier , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting on the Senate . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
first Reading 
hon. Sharon Carstairs presented Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , October 26 , 1999 . 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Refer to Committee the Order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Air Canada 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move : 
that , pursuant to subsection 47 ( 5 ) of the Canada Transportation Act , the order laid before this Chamber on September 14 , 1999 authorizing certain major air carriers and persons to negotiate and enter into any conditional agreement , be referred for review to the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications ; 
that the committee hear , amongst others , the Minister of Transport ; 
that the committee have the power to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings ; and 
that the committee submit its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I believe the Senate has a problem . 
the committee has not yet been formed because leave was not granted to proceed . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
this is only a notice . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am in your hands , honourable senators . 
is leave granted ? 
senator Hays : 
your Honour , this is a notice to deal with this motion at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if this is a notice to deal with the motion at the next sitting , there is no need for any approval by the Senate . 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study the Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that at the next sitting of the Senate , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be authorized to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada 
2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member . 
that the papers and evidence received by the committee on the subject of this reference during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the committee have the power to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings ; and 
that the committee submit its final report no later than November 18 , 1999 . 
la Francophonie Summit 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday , October 21 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the recent Francophonie Summit , which was held in Moncton last September . 
question PERIOD 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
possible Projects to Help Miners Qualify for Early Retirement Incentive Program - Government Position 
hon. John Buchanan : 
honourable senators , before I ask my question , I wish to welcome the Leader of the Government to the Senate . 
life is strange . 
the last time that I sat in a house with Senator Boudreau , I sat across from him . 
i was on the government side as premier and he was a member of the opposition . 
i am pleased that we are back in the same positions , but he is over there and I am over here . 
i look forward to working with the honourable senator in the Senate for many , many years to come . 
he may sit over there for a few years , but after the next federal election I will be sitting over there and he will be sitting over here . 
i am a real nice guy , and the Honourable Senator Boudreau knows that . 
i have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate on a matter that has been near and dear to his heart and mine over many , many years . 
it is with respect to the Cape Breton Development Corporation , Devco . 
i know that the honourable senator will work as hard as Senator Graham did as far as Devco is concerned - at least , I hope he will . 
my question is with regard to the situation with the Phalen colliery . 
at the present time they are stripping the belt line and the lower levels of the Phalen colliery . 
the miners are hoping that they will only strip the belt line up to the upper section of the Phalen colliery , where there is approximately 7.5 million tonnes of coal of which 5 million to 6 million tonnes are recoverable in the areas of 1 A west , 2 A west , 1 QZ , 2 QZ , and 1 Y and 2 Y . 
the United Mine Workers of America and the other unions at Devco are hoping that the federal government will see fit to allow them to mine that coal over the next few years so that the men so employed will have sufficient years to gain their pension rights at the end of the two - year period . 
otherwise , the mine will close and they will not have their pension rights . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate discuss this matter with the Prime Minister as quickly as possible so that these men will be kept actively at work in the Phalen colliery mining this 5 million to 6 million tonnes of recoverable coal ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank the honourable senator for his question . 
as my honourable colleague correctly points out , we have been in this situation before - except I was asking the questions then and he was providing the answers . 
senator Buchanan : 
that ' s right , and you always got the right answer . 
senator Boudreau : 
the honourable senator may find it more fun in his present position . 
before I address the question asked by the honourable senator , I should like to respond to the remarks made earlier today . 
i am truly humbled by the responsibility that has been placed before me , more so because of the distinguished way that my predecessor discharged those responsibilities . 
i wish to thank him on behalf of the Senate and the people of Canada . 
honourable senators , I was also warmed by the generous welcome and advice given by the Leader of the Opposition and , in particular , his suggestion that I may want to reconsider the length of my stay in this venerable institution . 
i wish to point out to him that on this particular question he has the full support of my wife . 
with respect to the question raised by the Honourable Senator Buchanan , Devco will be a matter of central concern to me as I attempt to discharge my responsibilities . 
we have both been familiar with the file for a considerable period of time . 
it is now going through a two - part process . 
the first part is to achieve an honourable human - resources resolution for those people who have been employed in the industry for many years . 
that is a matter of great importance , not only to them , but to all senators and to the Government of Canada . 
the other part , of course , is to assist with economic development to help the community adjust to the transition that is taking place . 
no one knows better than the honourable senator who asked the question that this is a fundamental transition from an industrial economy relying on one employer to a post - industrial economy . 
such a transition is never easy . 
with respect to the specific question , I will of course convey the concern . 
i will say , however , that the process of placing the resources in the hands of a private - sector operator is now underway . 
everyone seems to agree that this will be the best resolution for the situation . 
if the coal resources can be retrieved and mined safely , effectively and economically , I am sure every consideration will be given to the proposition by the new private operator . 
senator Buchanan : 
honourable senators , I will not comment on the privatization . 
i have my own sentiments on that issue . 
the problem with the 5 million to 6 million tonnes of recoverable coal is that if Devco management continues to persist in stripping the belt line up and beyond the upper sections of the Phalen colliery , it may be too late for a private operator to come in to mine that coal . 
it is fine if a private operator manages to do that , but the pension benefits must continue , then , for those miners who will be doing that work for the next two years . 
as the honourable senator knows , with the closure of Phalen , a considerable number of miners do not fit the formula for the early retirement incentive program . 
Phalen closed before anyone thought it would , and that is the problem at hand at the present time . 
i also wish to ask the honourable senator about the approximately 1,160 miners who will be affected when Phalen is closed . 
the bumpy process has already started with Prince colliery . 
the men who were displaced when Phalen closed down and the men who are on the maintenance end of Phalen have bumped men in Prince colliery , and approximately 250 of them have been given lay - off slips . 
when one combines those men with the others , some 1,100 miners will not have any pension benefits , including miners who have 20 years ' service but , when one adds their age , still do not have 75 points . 
in my opinion , that is most unfair , and it is most unfair in the opinion of the president and the executive members of the United Mine Workers . 
some method must be found to allow these people to be eligible for the early retirement incentive program . 
one project could be carried out , and it is quite simple . 
some honourable senators will know that a massive environmental cleanup is required at Devco . 
the same is true of Sydney Steel Corporation if something happens there . 
the Devco cleanup will cost about $ 150 million . 
that project is presently seen as being not a labour - intensive program but an equipment - intensive program . 
i am asking the new minister to , as quickly as possible , take this matter up with the Prime Minister . 
by the way , the Prime Minster , during the provincial election in Nova Scotia , sent a letter to Mrs. Edna Budden and the wives of miners telling them he would have officials in the department review all aspects of the early retirement incentive program . 
i do not know whether he has done that , but it must be addressed so these men are not just left out on the street . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the program put forward by the government , as the honourable senator will know , was affected in two ways by the early closure of the mine . 
first , some of the people who would have fit into the early retirement program , having achieved the required level of service , are not now able to do so because of the early closing . 
they lost the extra period of time needed to qualify , and as a result were affected quite directly . 
second , the plan was also affected because the corporation was relying on revenue which would have been generated by the operation of the mine for that period of time . 
because of those two consequences of the early closure , the government felt it necessary to review the plan which was put before the miners and the families some time ago . 
that review is still ongoing . 
i am very hopeful that we will be able to do something to improve the situation specifically for the groups we have just been discussing and who were affected directly by the early closure of the mine . 
i am hopeful that the Prime Minister and the ministers involved will be able to address that in some fashion . 
i certainly will be conveying your interest and your comments as well as my own . 
the Environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , if the minister does not have an answer to the following question , perhaps he could bring in a definitive statement in a couple of days ' time . 
what exactly is the position of the Government of Canada with regard to liability for the environmental cleanup of existing and abandoned mine sites now under their control in Cape Breton ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would be happy to confer with my colleagues in the Privy Council and to bring back a specific response . 
it is my impression that , as with other Crown corporations , the environmental liability will not go away . 
since it is highly unlikely that a purchaser will take it on , it looks like it could be ours . 
national Defence 
Nova Scotia - Funds for Cleanup of Flood Damage in Cumberland County 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I wish as well to extend my congratulations to the new leader . 
as someone who has served as minister of finance in a legislative assembly , he will know that funds for emergencies are not easily found . 
my question relates to Cumberland County in Nova Scotia , which was recently ravaged by floods . 
four bridges were washed out and as many as four roads were damaged beyond repair . 
the Province of Nova Scotia , as the honourable leader will know , is seeking federal assistance to cover more than $ 3 million worth of damage . 
would the honourable minister please tell us what steps he is prepared to take to ensure that the funds required for the cleanup in Cumberland County will be forthcoming ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I believe that request should be put to the Minister of National Defence . 
i assume from the honourable senator ' s remarks that such a request has come forward . 
i would also suggest that it must be dealt with in the context of an existing federal program , but I will give my honourable friend more detailed information as soon as I can obtain it . 
transport 
Nova Scotia - Possibility of Infrastructure Project to Rebuild Highway 101 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I , too , join in welcoming the new Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
and " their disgraceful mismanagement of the fisheries issue . " 
honourable senators , those words are a direct quotation of none other than the former Liberal premier of New Brunswick , Frank McKenna , as reported in The Globe and Mail of October 5 , 1999 . 
he went on to say : 
today , they are worse off than they were at election time [ in 1997 ] ... What 
[ Atlantic Canadians ] wanted from the federal government - the only thing they wanted - was a vision , was a sense of acknowledgement and hope .... That was never offered . 
what did the government do to address these serious concerns ? 
it dialled 911 , Senator Bernie Boudreau . 
well , let us start with Nova Scotia . 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it is in regard to Highway 101 in the province of Nova Scotia which has been the scene of automobile carnage resulting in many fatalities . 
as the minister responsible for Nova Scotia , what does he plan to do to address this serious problem ? 
will he commit himself and his government to federal highway infrastructure projects to rebuild and repair these potentially lethal sections of Highway 101 ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I was wondering when I might hear those words of Mr. McKenna ' s again . 
the vision to which he referred is one which I was pleased to see brought forward quite dramatically and effectively in yesterday ' s Speech from the Throne . 
discussions concerning highway infrastructure are currently underway with the Minister of Transport . 
there were references in the Throne Speech to both the traditional physical infrastructure and the infrastructure in the area of communications . 
i am encouraged by those comments . 
they will fit well with the federal government ' s plans as Nova Scotians move forward into the next millennium . 
i certainly will be discussing the matter with the minister . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , does the Leader of the Government in the Senate agree with the words of former premier McKenna ? 
many of us who have driven over that highway know of what we speak . 
it is an extremely dangerous section of the highway , as are other sections of other highways in other parts of the country . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the senator asks if I agree with Mr. McKenna who , I might add , is my former law partner . 
it will not come as a surprise to honourable senators that I do not agree with Mr. McKenna on that point . 
the fact of the matter is that the general prosperity that has been created in this country is almost unprecedented . 
the Governor of the Bank of Canada has indicated that over the last four quarters the real growth will be in excess of 4 per cent , something which is almost unheard of . 
equally remarkable is that even in the face of that growth , our inflation rate remains within the target areas - an incredible achievement . 
it is true that that achievement has not been shared equally in every part of the country . 
perhaps Mr. McKenna was making a dramatic point . 
however , I must tell honourable senators that in many parts of Atlantic Canada job creation and employment records clearly indicate that the prosperity has spread . 
it is not as much as we wanted , and it is not everywhere , but we continue to work on it . 
hopefully , we will have Mr. McKenna ' s support as we work toward our goals . 
with respect to the road in question , I am very familiar with it . 
i have driven it on many occasions . 
the main highway system in Nova Scotia , which the federal government has supported through funding , is quite good , though it is not good everywhere . 
much of the credit for what is good , I might say , deservedly belongs to Senator Buchanan . 
the Province of Nova Scotia does have a good highway system , but let me emphasize once again that not all of it is perfect . 
the honourable senator has identified one highway which should be addressed . 
i am confident that the Minister of Transport is having discussions in that regard with his provincial counterpart . 
the Environment 
Nova Scotia - Cleanup of Sidney Tar Ponds 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , my question is also directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i hope he will take note that we are testing him initially on the region with which he is most familiar . 
i will refrain from commenting on his skilful skating around the questions that he has been asked thus far . 
many of my friends in the environmental movement have worked long and hard over many years to bring this matter to the attention of the government . 
in fact , Mr. Don Deleskie , a private citizen , has gone to extraordinary lengths by staging a hunger strike . 
he has also taken to shovelling out the site himself . 
before the minister answers the question I would like to tell him that , recently , we in this house passed a government bill which specifically refrained from looking at the phasing - out and the generation of formidable toxic chemicals , such as PCBs and other materials which are in this toxic site . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for her question . 
in fact , I thank all senators for asking their questions on an area with which I am somewhat familiar . 
i am quite familiar with the tar ponds in Sydney . 
in the past , there have been some attempts at remediation of the tar ponds . 
some of these attempts have been very expensive and not very successful . 
a great deal of money has been expended with questionable results . 
there have been attempts by government at both levels , and of all political stripes , to impose a solution on the community . 
those attempts have not gone very well either . 
however , now , with this major initiative by , primarily , the federal government , but in cooperation with the provincial government , some $ 62 million has been committed to commence what , hopefully , will be the final remediation of this site . 
having learned from past experience , which was not all that pleasant or productive , we have created a process that involves the community in seeking a solution to this problem . 
it is a community - based approach . 
the problem with doing things this way is that it takes time . 
it is much quicker to impose a solution than it is to seek a consensus in the community . 
thus , a joint action group composed of people from various sectors in the community has been established . 
the federal government has joined in a program with the provincial government to commit $ 62 million , 70 per cent of which is federal money . 
a substantial commitment has been made . 
the joint action group is reaching the completion of the first stage of its work and hopes to move on as quickly as possible with the remediation . 
it is worth the time and the effort to bring this community consensus to the fore . 
i have seen it done the other way and the results were not particularly acceptable . 
principles of Payment by Polluters , Pollution Prevention and Phasing out of Toxic Chemicals - Position of Leader of the Government 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , community consensus is a wonderful thing . 
however , in this case the responsibility for what went on is certainly not that of the community . 
it was the company which left the mess . 
in light of the bill that we just passed , is the Leader of the Government personally committed to the principles of pollution prevention , polluter pays and , most important , the phasing out of the manufacture , generation and use of such toxic chemicals so that in the future we need not be faced with this question again ? 
by the way , much time was spent working with government solutions imposed without community consensus , so the short time it might take to arrive at a community consensus should hardly be a concern . 
i would like to get a sense of how the minister from Nova Scotia , the Leader of the Government here in the Senate , views the very important questions of polluter pays , pollution prevention and , most important , the phasing out of the use and generation of the most toxic chemicals , some of which are not yet phased out . 
it has just recently been discovered that whales off the coast of British Columbia have a tremendous amount of PCBs in their bodies as a result of the generation and use of the most toxic chemicals . 
hon. J Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , community participation and consensus building came as a result of demands on both levels of government by the community . 
the government complied with those demands . 
it is a valuable and necessary process , even if it does slow progress a little at the front end . 
with regard to the other issue that the honourable senator raised , the tar ponds situation took close to 100 years to create . 
it would never be repeated today . 
i have no significant disagreement with the statements the honourable senator has made . 
i would like to have an opportunity to discuss the matter with her in more detail , but I take no great exception to the comments made . 
we must never allow another such situation to be created . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , I am delighted to hear that the Leader of the Government in the Senate is in agreement with at least this side of the house that we need to phase out the manufacture and generation of the most toxic chemicals . 
i thank him for that very helpful statement . 
agriculture 
efficacy of Programs for Problems Faced by Farmers 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I , too , welcome the new Leader of the Government in the Senate and wish him well . 
my question is in an area with which he is familiar . 
Nova Scotia farmers have suffered three years of drought . 
the program which the government brought forward has not dealt with this situation . 
it pays farmers 70 per cent of their average income over the last three years . 
honourable senators , 70 per cent of nothing is nothing . 
is the Leader of the Government aware of this ? 
if so , what will he do about it ? 
in addition , I wish to make him aware of the situation in Saskatchewan , Alberta , and Manitoba . 
farmers are here in Ottawa today , as they have been for the last three days . 
they are facing a crisis situation in Canada . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate carry this message to the cabinet and express the urgency of the national problem this country faces in some areas of agriculture ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I know that Senator Gustafson is from Saskatchewan . I had the occasion last month to travel to Regina in my then capacity as a member of the board of the Bank of Canada . 
on that visit , we were briefed by farm leaders and economists specifically in relation to the agriculture situation on the Prairies . 
although I obviously do not have the same understanding as the senator , I have some understanding of the difficulties and the desire for a fair and even playing field . 
the federal and provincial governments have provided an extra $ 1.5 billion in assistance to farmers in the Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program . 
part of the difficulty is that to date the program has only delivered $ 190 million of that commitment . 
however , by the end of the year , we expect this amount will increase to $ 550 million . 
the pace will pick up , and it is hoped that the problem to which the senator refers will be alleviated somewhat . 
senator Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I thank the minister for that response . 
the problem is that the AIDA program has not been working . 
the formula does not work , as senators on both sides of the house from both the Prairies and Nova Scotia know . 
it does not work simply because it is predicated on 70 per cent of the average income over the last three years . 
the farmer who has had three bad years in a row is in big trouble . 
the program will not trigger for him . 
therein lies a major problem . 
the government must apportion the moneys that have been appropriated in such a way that they can be accessed . 
this issue is of national concern . 
this country cannot afford to lose its farmers . 
we were told last night that we may lose 30,000 to 40,000 farmers to bankruptcy . 
the problem is so urgent that something must be done immediately . 
farm groups have been trying to get through to the Prime Minister . 
prime Minister Trudeau was not one of the most loved in the West , as the leader knows , but he did come to Regina , Saskatchewan . He stood on the steps of the legislature , and the farmers were not very kind to him . 
they threw wheat in his face . 
however , he did come . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell the Prime Minister that our farmers are waiting to hear from him about the situation in agriculture ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would be happy to do that on behalf of Senator Gustafson . 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study the Consequences of the European Monetary Union 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notice of Motions : 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , I shall move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be authorized to examine and report on the consequences for Canada of the emerging European Monetary Union and on other related trade and investment matters ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and the work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the committee ; 
that the committee submit its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 and that committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
hon. Richard H . Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , moved : 
that the following Address be presented to Her Excellency the Governor General of Canada : 
to Her Excellency the Right Honourable Adrienne Clarkson , Chancellor and Principal Companion of the Order of Canada , Chancellor and Commander of the Order of Military Merit , Governor General and Commander - in - Chief of Canada . 
may IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY : 
we , Her Majesty ' s most loyal and dutiful subjects , the Senate of Canada in Parliament assembled , beg leave to offer our humble thanks to Your Excellency for the gracious Speech which Your Excellency has addressed to both Houses of Parliament . 
fundamental to the framework of proposals set out in her address , and indeed what makes many of them possible , are the current and anticipated surpluses in Canada ' s accounts . 
this is a far cry from the painful struggle with mounting debt that so recently denied us opportunities , twisted our priorities and clouded our future . 
through the sacrifice of all Canadians and the determination and excellent management of our government , we now face the very different yet also very challenging choices of where to direct the expanding resources of the Canadian people . 
we have all become aware that , among the general public , in the media , and with our own political parties , there are many ideas , many dreams , many different priorities , and many different paths to the same goals . 
it is the task of the government to listen carefully to all voices , to conduct its own studies and evaluations and , in the end , to determine a course of action . 
it is on that course of action and on the effectiveness of its execution that the government will be judged . 
more important , it is on the quality of those decisions and actions of government that the future well - being of Canada and individual Canadians will depend . 
the Governor General has spoken of the directions the government intends to take and the doors that can now be opened - doors to a better and more exciting future in Canada for the first generations of Canadians in the new millennium . 
these doors are marked " Enter " , not " Exit " . 
these doors will open to opportunity , not blank walls . 
they are doors to secure homes , doors to education , doors to research , and doors to productive and rewarding employment . 
the Governor General has indicated where the government proposes to lead Canadians in the years ahead and has explained why it feels those goals are important . 
today , honourable senators , I want to tell you something of how I see our country - something of its past , something of its present , and certainly something of its future from my own very personal perspective . 
i am honoured and delighted to have this opportunity to speak in reply to the Speech from the Throne . 
since I have just declared I will speak from my personal perspective , it is important for me to describe that perspective with some care . 
since arriving at the Senate , I have come to understand better what these expressions really mean , so let me tell you about the point - or rather points - from which I view this country . 
first , there is the critical matter of geography . 
i live in the centre of Canada . 
while that statement may shock many in this city , and many more in Toronto , it is nevertheless true . 
it is only a 20 - minute drive from downtown Winnipeg to the longitudinal centre of Canada . 
that is not just a geographical oddity ; it is a significant reality . 
it means that there are two time zones to the west and two and one - half - or is it three - to the east . 
it means that the western half of our province is part of the vast richness and beauty of the prairie and that the east is solidly built on the Canadian Shield . 
one cannot live where I do , between Saskatchewan and Ontario , without seeing this country differently from others less favoured . 
honourable senators , lest anyone confuse our geography with isolation or insularity , let me put your minds as rest . 
our cultural and linguistic ties with Quebec are solidly rooted in the Franco - Manitoban community centred in St. Boniface . 
for all of Canada ' s life , this has been one of the two most important French language and cultural communities outside of Quebec . Much of our population migrated to Manitoba from Ontario and the Atlantic provinces . 
our cultural institutions - theatre , ballet and music - are internationally renowned and rooted in an ethnically rich population mix . 
our business community , built on over a century of international commodity trading and now rich in new technologies , is one of the most outward - looking in Canada . 
we see the entire world as our natural market . 
our producers , merchants and traders have long understood and thrived on the reality of globalization . 
perhaps Manitoba ' s place in the world was most vividly illustrated by the stunningly successful Pan American Games staged there this past summer . 
it was the largest such event in Canada ' s history and the third largest ever held anywhere . 
nothing could have better explained us to Canada and to the world . 
while honourable senators may take the last few comments as a bit of parochial promotion , that was not their purpose . 
i mention these things to remind you that Manitoba and the City of Winnipeg are dynamic elements of today ' s Canada and an important viewing point from which to observe and comment upon the important issues of the day . 
there is no malice in this , but if not challenged it can lead to an unfortunate misunderstanding of this country and its needs and opportunities . 
our Fathers of Confederation understood this danger and designed this Senate with a balanced voice from all regions . 
it is the duty and responsibility of those of us from outside the great centres of population to speak strongly and often , in this chamber and in committee , so that all of Canada can be heard . 
i also speak today from a generational vantage point that fundamentally conditions my view . 
i was born on the eve of World War II , and certain events and feelings from the war years and those immediately following are vivid in my memory . 
i received most of my formal education in the amazing 1950 s , which I believe to be the most underrated decade of this century . 
i began my first political activities just as Lester Pearson began his leadership of the Liberal Party of Canada . 
in fact , an evening with Mr. Pearson , then leader of the opposition , in a small group in Winnipeg in the late 1950 s sealed my lifelong commitment to the Liberal Party . 
i had my first working experience in public service here on Parliament Hill while he was still Prime Minister . 
i cannot help but observe in passing that , with barely five years in office and never with a majority , Mr. Pearson forever changed and enriched this nation . 
in making this statement , I think of the major social programs he and his governments brought us . 
having said that , it occurred to me again just the other day how difficult it is to imagine Canada in 1999 without our own distinctive flag . 
for many Canadians , that act of sheer political will and pride in Canada marks the Pearson era . 
i was also here to see the emergence of Mr. Trudeau and the early days of his remarkable leadership . 
Ottawa became a magnet for talented young men and women full of energy , ideas , and a belief that anything was possible and that Canada was the place you could do it . 
none of us - and there are several in this chamber today - who were here to share the experiences of those years can ever forget them , nor , more important , have we ever seen our country the same way again . 
a fundamental thing we learned was never to underestimate Canada and never , never to underestimate how important and powerful is the idea of Canada to Canadians and to people throughout the world . 
honourable senators , if there is a single memory I carry from the period 1966 to 1969 , it is the remarkable sense of optimism that pervaded everything and everyone . 
" Expo '67 " was a dramatic and exciting expression of Canada ' s belief in itself and its place in the world . 
i reflect now and realize the enormous power of such confidence and optimism and the incredible energizing force they can create for a country and its people . 
as I look today at the strength of Canada and its economy , our freedom from major international conflict , the truly mind - blowing revolution we are entering in science and technology , and the combined power of all these to enhance the quality and richness of the lives of all Canadians and the nearly 6 billion souls with whom we share this planet , I feel , again , and even more so , the optimism I felt as a young man here on Parliament Hill . 
finally , honourable senators , I speak from the perspective of one still very new to this chamber . 
it is little more than a year ago that I came here to begin a new career . 
for the previous 30 years , though trained as a lawyer , I was a businessperson , looking to build a company in Canada and beyond . 
in doing that , I learned a great deal about the realities of business life and the working of our economy . 
i learned of the critical need for educated and technically trained people in all disciplines . 
i learned that leadership is a skill demanded and practised at every level of every successful enterprise . 
i learned that pride in one ' s company and products is a fundamental key to success and that pride in one ' s country grows stronger and stronger as products and services are carried outside our borders and around the globe . 
honourable senators , we must continue to draw all that is good from our proximity and friendship and to avoid the pitfalls inherent in the inequalities of wealth and scale . 
it has been thus since Sir John A . Macdonald first assessed our future and it has never been more true than today . 
as Canadians , we are and must continue to be firmly rooted in our own established values and identity . 
there can be no true progress in a society that is not fair and humane . 
however , as the world becomes increasingly interconnected , we must concentrate on particular demands of the 21 st century . 
first is the need for a richer and more compelling Canadian economic and cultural life to capture the imaginations and provide new opportunities for our young people . 
these we must have to excite them to build their lives and careers here in Canada . 
honourable senators , I have a strong conviction still rooted in the excitement and optimism I tasted here more than 30 years ago that I am not alone in believing we can reach them . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. George J . Furey : 
honourable senators , it is an honour and a privilege for me to second the motion moved by my esteemed colleague and friend Senator Kroft for an address in reply to Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne . 
i see here women and men who have done much for Canada and I am honoured and awed to be a part of this great institution . 
i wish to take a moment to congratulate Senators Graham and Carstairs on the work they have done as Leader and Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
while I have not spent much time with them in that capacity , during the first two rather raucous weeks of September , I was able to see firsthand the hard work and dedication they brought to their work in this chamber . 
i wish both senators well in their new roles and look forward to their continued contributions and assistance . 
a special welcome to Senator Boudreau , as he takes over the reins of leadership . 
i would be remiss , honourable senators , if I did not applaud the performance of our new Governor General yesterday when she delivered the Speech from the Throne . 
her accomplishments as a broadcaster , journalist and activist for so many worthy causes have made her one of our great country ' s icons . 
i look forward with enthusiasm to seeing the energy and spirit she brings to the viceregal office over the coming years . 
honourable senators , to be involved in public life at this time in our nation ' s history - a time of important challenges and exciting possibilities , a time of globalization and technical wizardry - is both an honour and a privilege . 
we are indeed at the dawn of a new millennium . 
this is not just a significant time for our great country ; it is also a significant turning point for the great Province of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
these last months of 1999 are a natural time for Newfoundlanders to reflect upon where we stand as a province , as people of this great country and upon our prospects for the future . 
today , Newfoundland and Labrador finds itself caught up in the sweeping economic and technological changes that are making their way throughout the world . 
far from being swamped by these forces , however , the people of Newfoundland and Labrador are drawing on some long - standing skills and assets to deal with these fast - changing realities . 
creativity , resilience , community solidarity , determination and hard work are enabling many to realize their dreams and to move their province and their country forward . 
recent economic statistics tell us a lot about the direction our province is heading . 
the Conference Board of Canada has noted that at 5.2 per cent , Newfoundland heads Canada in real GDP growth . 
employment prospects are also improving , with employment down by over 2.5 per cent from last year . 
honourable senators are aware of the benefits of megaprojects such as Hibernia , the Lower Churchill and the eventual development of Voisey ' s Bay nickel . 
while the contributions of these great projects to Newfoundland ' s economic success are critical , they are by no means the end of our story . 
across the economic spectrum , provincially - based companies are achieving ever growing levels of success . 
no doubt , the contributions made by traditional industries like mining , forestry and the fisheries will remain central to our economic well - being . 
simultaneously , however , a real dynamic of diversification has also taken hold . 
provincially - based companies are making their marks in areas such as communications , high - tech manufacturing and hazardous waste management . 
honourable senators , one of the most important economic growth areas for Newfoundland in recent years has been tourism , and the trend is set to continue . 
" Soiree '99 " , which celebrates Newfoundland ' s contribution to Canada on the 50 th anniversary of joining Confederation , has been a huge , nationwide success . 
its festivals , concerts and events , which included a temporary takeover of the CN Tower last summer , have proven to be a great success story . 
these events have built momentum towards the next big celebration in the year 2000 honouring the 1,000 - year anniversary of the Vikings ' arrival in the New World . 
the 1999 Canada Winter Games held in Corner Brook were also a tremendous success . 
praised as being one of the best Games ever , the events showcased the province to television viewers and visitors from across the country . 
the success of the Canada Winter Games , honourable senators , serves as a great example of one of the key areas of Newfoundland ' s strengths which I wish to highlight - the generous , resourceful , caring and friendly character of the Newfoundland people . 
it is not trite to say that economic measures alone are not sufficient indicators of what makes a society great . 
canada is not the great country it is today solely based on its economic performance . 
sound and responsible economic policy is indeed quite important , and both our Newfoundland and federal governments should be commended for outstanding achievement in this area . 
the greatness , however , of our province and of our country goes well beyond concerns for economic performance . 
the real measure of what makes us a great country in which to live , of what distinguishes us from our neighbours to the south and what sets us apart as the envy of all other countries is the great Canadian passion for understanding and caring - understanding and caring for those in society who are vulnerable , those who are less able to take care of themselves . 
honourable senators , if we are to remain the envy of the world , we must never take this for granted . 
we must continuously work to ensure the flame of this great Canadian passion is always fanned and never allowed to wane . 
nowhere in our great country , honourable senators , are these values better exemplified than in Newfoundland and Labrador . 
the quality of life enjoyed in Newfoundland defies conventional economic measures , for you cannot put a price tag on the value of community ties , you cannot put a price tag on the value of cultural expression , and you cannot put a price tag on the value of caring . 
there is no doubt , honourable senators , that quality of life is directly related to the caring , giving nature of a society . 
in the 1997 National Survey of Giving , Volunteering and Participating , the people of Newfoundland and Labrador once again showed themselves to be among the most generous in Canada . 
more than one - third of the population gave of their time volunteering for charitable causes . 
Newfoundlanders had the highest rate of making financial contributions to charities in Canada , with 84 per cent of the population over 15 years of age giving to help others . 
this generosity of spirit , often in difficult times , can be found deeply rooted in Newfoundland ' s history . 
it is born of a people who , for 500 years , have known great adversity , a people who have used that great adversity to bind and not to separate . 
a thousand years to trace . 
honourable senators , while there are many positive things happening today in Newfoundland and Labrador , there remain many challenges to be faced and problems to be overcome . 
it is very encouraging to hear in the Speech from the Throne that the Government of Canada is committed to addressing many of these concerns . 
there are two concerns in particular on which I wish to comment . 
the first is the problem of out - migration . 
many families in Newfoundland and Labrador know the pain of losing friends and family to other parts of Canada and the world . 
although the population decline as of July 1 this year was the lowest it has been since the closure of the ground fishery , it is still too high . 
it is encouraging to note that Premier Tobin and his government are sensitive to this concern and committed to improving it . 
it is encouraging as well , honourable senators , that the Government of Canada in the Speech from the Throne has committed not only to work at keeping our youth in Canada but to make Canada known as the very best place to be in the 21 st century , a place where the best and the brightest from the rest of the world will want to come . 
these commitments to put money towards research , innovative business and skills will go a long way towards enabling our young people in Newfoundland and across Canada to remain at home to pursue their dreams . 
a related challenge , honourable senators , is the need to continue to improve the quality and availability of educational opportunities for our youth . 
young Canadians in Newfoundland and elsewhere hope to make the most of new opportunities to make it on their own . 
they cannot do this without the right kind of educational support . 
in 1999 , Memorial University of Newfoundland celebrates its fiftieth anniversary as a degree - granting institution . 
over the course of those 50 years , Memorial University has played a vital role in the development of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
although access to the quality education provided by Memorial and Canada ' s universities and colleges has broadened over the years , many students in Newfoundland and across Canada are prevented from undertaking post - secondary studies because of financial barriers such as insufficient funding and high tuition . 
many others are forced to end their studies before completion because of problems such as huge student debt loads . 
i know those problems , honourable senators , and I know them firsthand . 
without the great opportunity afforded me in the 1960 s by then premier Smallwood and his government ' s program of free tuition , I doubt that I would be addressing you in this chamber today . 
fortunately , many of the investments geared towards improving productivity and combating the out - migration announced in the Speech from the Throne will be channelled through Canadian universities in support of research and development in areas like health care and high technology . 
these new resources , together with initiatives like the Millennium Scholarship Fund , will go a long way to making post - secondary education more accessible to students . 
to be ready to pursue some form of advanced training , however , children need to grow up in a safe and secure environment where they are provided with the necessities of life and are encouraged to learn and get the most from their primary and secondary education . 
as members of this chamber are well aware , far too many children across Canada live in impoverished conditions . 
indeed , if there is but one child in Canada living in poverty , it is a blight on our great Canadian social fabric . 
if Canada is to succeed socially and economically in the future , child poverty must be eradicated . 
as the Speech from the Throne made obvious , honourable senators , the children ' s agenda is the government ' s agenda . 
throughout the speech , much attention was paid to the actions that the government will take to make a real difference in bettering the lot of this nation ' s children . 
through expansion of existing programs like the child tax credit , the neonatal nutrition program and parental leave , our government has committed to making a real difference . 
one of the keys to the success of these efforts will be close cooperation with provincial governments to coordinate delivery of programs and services . 
honourable senators , when tourists come from all over the world to Newfoundland and , indeed , to the rest of Canada , a central part of what draws them is the beauty of our oceans , our forests , our mountains and our rivers . 
to protect Canada ' s reputation as a place of incredible beauty and ecological diversity , more must be done to protect the natural environment , including the many species of plant and animal life whose existence is threatened by human encroachment on their habitat . 
we in Newfoundland , honourable senators , know better than most that when nature ' s balance is tipped , the effects on people can be devastating and far - reaching . 
it is therefore with real enthusiasm that I welcome the government ' s efforts to do more to protect the integrity of our natural systems . 
through measures such as moving to reduce toxic emissions and working on comprehensive endangered species legislation , Canada will be able to live up to the commitment it has to future generations to conserve our natural history . 
honourable senators , during the 1997 election campaign , the government promised Canadians that 50 per cent of the fiscal dividend would go to new spending on social priorities , while the other 50 per cent would be divided between targeted tax cuts and repayment of the national debt . 
in the Speech from the Throne , the government has affirmed that this commitment is on its way in the next budget . 
this is welcome news for all Canadians who have endured many years of decreases in programs and services without similar reductions in tax levels . 
it is important as well that we not overlook the significance of paying down the national debt . 
although it comes as no shock to members of this chamber , many Canadians are surprised to discover that the single biggest expenditure of the Government of Canada is interest payments on the national debt - payments which total in the neighbourhood of $ 40 billion each year , money that could be put to good use elsewhere but cannot be until the debt is brought down . 
a balanced approach is essential in today ' s global economy , an economy which is rapidly changing and extremely volatile . 
governments , as a result , must be more flexible and able to take more strategic approaches to dealing with challenges . 
this is essential if we are to adhere to those values that separate us from the rest of the world . 
as parliamentarians , we must exhort and encourage all levels of government to be ever mindful of those great Canadian values that set us apart , for while there continue to exist disadvantaged individuals in our society , while there are underprivileged children in our society , while there is a lack of sound health care for the sick and elderly in our society , and while there are shortcomings and , indeed , failures in our educational systems to deliver equal educational opportunities to all Canadians , then , as members of that society , we are all diminished . 
the great English poet John Donne put it best in his rather short but poignant poem , " No Man is an Island . " 
as members of our great Canadian society , I urge all honourable senators to listen to the last lines of that poem and to ever let them tweak the collective Canadian consciousness that must always be tweaked if we are always to remember those values that set us apart : 
and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls ; It tolls for thee . 
the continued adoption of the kind of approach to public policy this government has taken will be critical if government is to retain a positive and caring role in the 21 st century . 
i am excited about the initiatives put forward in the Speech from the Throne and about the possibilities that exist for Newfoundland and Labrador , and Canada , as we head into the 21 st century . 
honourable senators , I look forward to working with each of you in doing our part in ensuring that Canada really is the very best place to live in the 21 st century . 
on motion of Senator Boudreau , debate adjourned . 
adjournment 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notices of Motions : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , at 9 a.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
questions of Privilege 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , two honourable senators have indicated they wish to proceed with their questions of privilege . 
of course , if that is the wish of the Senate , I am quite prepared to recognize them . 
however , I wish to point out that I have already ruled on both questions of privilege and that the Senate has agreed to the motions proposed by both senators that these questions of privilege be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
if it is the wish of the Senate , the honourable senators could simply repeat the motions that were passed in the previous session . 
however , if it is the wish of the honourable senators to speak , quite obviously they are free to do so . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I should like essentially to articulate exactly what His Honour has just said . 
both questions of privilege were raised under rule 43 , His Honour had made a decision , the sense of the house had been taken , and the matter had been referred to the committee . 
i believe that what is required is simply a renewal or confirmation that the sense of the house is still the same and that , with leave or under rule 59 ( 10 ) , the two senators simply be permitted to move their motions forthwith . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , as a proponent of one of the questions of privilege raised in the last session , I would be happy to proceed in any way the honourable house wishes to proceed . 
however , there are at least two schools of thought around whether a question of privilege that is raised continues to be a privilege before Parliament when there is a prorogation of Parliament . 
my personal interest is simply operating on the principle of having greater surety . 
i believe this to be a very serious matter of privilege , and I believe there was agreement with that in this chamber before prorogation . 
indeed , His Honour had found there to be a prima facie case of breach of privilege . 
however , because there are two schools of thought , I wanted a greater degree of certitude , and thus I proceeded to give oral notice . 
if honourable senators agree , I could speak briefly to the matter and His Honour could find , if he still is of the same view , that there is a prima facie case . 
then there would be no doubt and the appropriate motions could be made to refer the matter to the committee once it is formed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if I hear no contrary opinion , then I will recognize the Honourable Senator Andreychuk . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to ensure that my motion and this question of privilege not be lost . 
i do not intend to go through the material in any great detail . 
i simply want to refer honourable senators to what I had said on September 14 . 
the National Post had published unauthorized drafts of the Aboriginal Peoples Committee report . 
there were a number of outstanding drafts ; obviously , these came to the attention of the newspaper . 
i want to make it clear that at no time am I making any comment about the fact that the newspaper published the draft reports . 
for the sake of brevity , I need not reiterate what I have said . 
all the comments I intended to make , I made on September 14 . 
i simply wish those to be included in this motion . 
the documents that were tabled then spoke for themselves , and I trust that the ruling will be the same and that I can then proceed with the motion to have the matter referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Rules and Orders . 
speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak on the question of privilege , my ruling is the same as the one that I gave on September 14 . 
i recognize that a prima facie case has been made and it is in order for the honourable senator to proceed with her motion . 
however , I wonder if we might amend the motion a little . 
in view of the fact that the committee is not yet constituted , we cannot proceed to refer it to a non - existing committee . 
perhaps we could add to the motion that , " Once the committee of selection is established , this matter be referred to the committee . " 
is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I attended a meeting this morning at 9:30 a.m. that went very quickly . 
could we know why they did not strike that committee this morning ? 
the meeting to strike committees began at 9:30 a.m. and then quickly adjourned . 
when can we expect the other committees to be struck ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I regret that I cannot answer that question . 
however , I see the Deputy Leader of the Government standing . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not sure about whether or not the question is in order . 
it would be in order during Question Period , but let me volunteer an answer now . 
the committees that were struck today were struck to accommodate the fact that both committees have immediate work to do . 
we are early in the session , and it is the desire of leadership on this side to give fuller consideration than we have been able to give to the membership of the committees that the Committee of Selection will be striking . 
meetings will begin as early as tomorrow on that subject . 
that is the answer , Senator Prud ' homme . 
referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , then I will move : 
that the question of privilege concerning the unauthorized release of working drafts of a report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders when that Committee is established . 
the Hon. the Speake r : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , to be accurate , the Selection Committee does not restructure a committee , the Senate of Canada restructures them . 
the wording should be , " once the committee has been set up by the Senate of Canada on report of . " 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreeable that we amend the motion to convey exactly that ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I do not wish , so early in the session , to invoke the Rules of the Senate because my good friend Senator Hays says that he is not certain that the question is in order . 
it is completely out of order . 
yesterday , I opposed adoption of the motion on appointments to the Committee of Selection . 
this they did , most promptly . 
they selected the members of two committees . 
i am not out of order with what I have just said . 
in my opinion , this morning ' s meeting was called to nominate the members of all the committees . 
that the leaders on both sides of the chamber decided to nominate the members of only two committees is not a problem for me . 
but to move from that to the conclusion that I am out of order , I disagree with . 
all one has to do is to carefully reread the motion agreed to yesterday , when I thought it was going to be today . 
i could have debated these matters just now , but I preferred to wait for tomorrow . 
i am not out of order in stating that the Committee of Selection sat this morning and could have nominated the members for all the committees . 
in its wisdom , it decided to nominate members for just two committees . 
senator Hays is right , therefore , but so am I. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am not going to determine who is right and who wrong . 
i just want to point out to you that consideration of the reports of the selection committee has been deferred until tomorrow . 
you will then have an opportunity , during consideration of the first and second reports , to put forward your proposal . 
the Senate now has before it the motion by the Honourable Senator Andreychuck , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare : 
that the question of privilege concerning the unauthorized release of working drafts of a report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders when that Committee is established . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
his Honour ruled on September 9 that there was a prima facie case and the matter was referred to the then Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders for investigation and report . 
as we indicated a few moments ago , the matter of privilege is brought in for the greatness of certainty and I would ask that His Honour find , as he found before , that a prima facie case of privilege exists . 
if His Honour so decides , then I would be prepared to move an appropriate motion . 
speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak on the question of privilege , I am prepared to rule now . 
as I ruled on September 9 , in my view , the honourable senator did establish a prima facie case and can therefore proceed with the motion referring the matter to committee . 
referred to Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I move : 
that the question of privilege in respect of a witness who appeared before the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , when that Committee is established , for investigation and report . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow , Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , at 9:00 a.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 3 
Thursday , October 14 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights 
persons Awards 1999 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
point of Order 
Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association 
Canadian Delegation to Spring Session of North Atlantic Assembly Held in Warsaw , Poland - Report Tabled 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
notice of Inquiry 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
committee of Selection 
first Report Adopted 
second Report Adopted 
visitors in the Gallery 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Study Order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Air Canada 
foreign affairs 
committee Authorized to Study Changing Mandate of North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
motion in Amendment 
committee Authorized to Studythe Consequences of the European Monetary Union 
business of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Thursday , October 14 , 1999 
the Senate met at 9:00 a.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I ask for your indulgence while I say a word about the situation in the East Coast fishery . 
the latest development - and I confess that I am relying almost exclusively on media reports this morning - is that the chiefs appear to have renounced the 30 - day moratorium to which they had earlier agreed . 
again , relying on media reports of the debate in another place last night , it appears that the Minister of Fisheries , Mr. Dhaliwal , was caught unaware by this development , as indeed the government had been caught flat - footed some four weeks ago by the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
far be it from me , honourable senators , to pose as a legal expert , still less as an interpreter of the Supreme Court of Canada decision , but the assertion by one of the chiefs this morning that they reserve the right to regulate their own fishery is , in my humble opinion , contrary to the judgment brought down by the Supreme Court of Canada . 
the majority decision written by Mr. Justice Binnie refers to : 
... the narrow ambit and extent of the treaty right . 
he writes : 
the treaty right is a regulated right and can be contained by regulation within its proper limits . 
catch limits that could reasonably be expected to produce a moderate livelihood for individual Mi ' kmaq families at present - day standards can be established by regulation and enforced without violating the treaty right . 
such regulations would accommodate the treaty and would not constitute an infringement that would have to be justified under the Badger standard . 
honourable senators , it seems to me that those statements constitute an invitation on the part of the Supreme Court of Canada to the government to bring in regulations . 
when the judge refers to regulations and catch limits and the imposition of regulations , one must assume that he is speaking of regulations which would be brought in by the government . 
approximately two weeks ago , the Prime Minister was heard to say that the government was considering asking the Supreme Court for a stay of its judgment . 
more recently , the Minister of Fisheries rounded on opposition members who were asking for the same thing . 
i assume that the option of asking for a stay of the judgment has been considered and rejected by the government and that that option is no longer open . 
it seems to me , therefore , that the only course now open to the government is to bring in legislation and / or regulations . 
further , the government will have to consider referring these regulations directly to the Supreme Court of Canada to ensure that they are consistent with the Supreme Court of Canada judgment . 
i doubt very much that anything less will be acceptable to the aboriginals . 
any set of regulations that is brought in is bound to be contested and will have to go through the entire judicial process from bottom to top . 
it strikes me as prudent for the government to refer any such regulations to the Supreme Court of Canada . 
honourable senators , I make these points simply because the situation is going from bad to worse day by day . 
one does not want to be alarmist , but we are all familiar with the incidents of violence and those verging on violence that have taken place in the region . 
a legal vacuum has been created by the Supreme Court of Canada . 
others have moved into that vacuum , and it appears to me that we are on the verge of chaos . 
persons Awards 1999 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I rise today to highlight that Monday , October 18 , 1999 , is Persons Day . 
it was this day in 1929 that the British Privy Council decided that women were " persons " under Canadian law and , therefore , eligible for appointment to the Senate . 
this decision was rendered after a lengthy legal and political struggle waged by Emily Murphy , Nellie McClung , Louise McKinny , Irene Parlby and Henrietta Muir Edwards - five Canadian women more commonly known as the Famous Five . 
since 1979 , in commemoration of the Persons Case , Governor General ' s Awards are presented on or around October 18 to candidates who have made an outstanding and lifetime contribution to the advancement of women . 
i am proud today to tell this chamber that one of this year ' s five recipients is Anne Marie Perry from Tignish , Prince Edward Island . 
Anne Marie is an outstanding Islander who has made and continues to make a tremendous contribution to her community , her province and her country . 
she is the second Islander to receive this prestigious award . 
Helen Yeo of Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island , won this award in 1986 . 
at the provincial level , she identified and supported program changes to enhance the opportunities of women during her term as member and chairperson of the Appeals Board for Social Services of Prince Edward Island . 
at the national level , Ms Perry was an active member of the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women from 1981 to 1986 . 
Anne Marie shares the spotlight this year with four other recipients : 
Ms Bertha Allen of Inuvik , Northwest Territories ; Ms Maria Eriksen of Calgary , Alberta ; Ms Enid Page of Aylmer , Quebec ; and Dr. Bette Stephenson of Richmond Hill , Ontario . 
honourable senators , all five of this year ' s winners should be congratulated for their outstanding work in their various communities in the advancement of women . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
following on the statement by Honourable Senator Callbeck , I can advise honourable senators that the presentation of Governor General ' s Awards normally takes place at Rideau Hall and is always followed by a dinner held here in the Senate by the Speaker of the Senate . 
this year , it was decided to have the awards presented in Calgary because Alberta was the site where the five women were then located . 
the presentation will be held next Monday in Calgary . 
i shall be present on behalf of the Senate , and all honourable senators who wish to attend are invited . 
if you require more detail , please contact my office . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I will not conceal the fact that this extended adjournment disturbs me considerably . 
we have just come back . 
i would have liked to see the Senate sit , if not next week , at least the following one . 
i cannot understand why the Senate committees have not already been established . 
these various committees could have undertaken some extraordinary work . 
the Transportation and Communications Committee and the Foreign Affairs Committee should have been sitting today . 
point of Order 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
it is not even a motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , leave was granted to move a motion . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
that is right . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the motion is before the Senate . 
my understanding is that , leave being granted , it then becomes a debatable motion . 
i agree that normally an adjournment motion is not debatable . 
senator Kinsella : 
it is a notice of motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
there was a motion to adjourn to a later date . 
i have not consulted the rules , but given that leave was granted , I believe it is debatable . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , we are under Government Notices of Motion . 
a notice of motion was given , and there is no debate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , leave was granted by the Senate , which changes the position of that motion . 
it is no longer simply a notice of motion if leave is granted . 
however , if there is discussion on the matter , I am prepared to take it under advisement and come back with a formal statement . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have heard His Honour and others , and I am quite happy to hear from Senator Prud ' homme and respond to his concerns , if that is in order . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I will not abuse your kindness . 
i will be brief . 
i can inform her that I shall soon know the book by heart , and we will have an interesting debate in the future . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , unlike some , I have not spent a great deal of time on the rules of this chamber . 
in response to Senator Prud ' homme ' s comments , I would first observe that the Senate did recently sit for two weeks - the first two weeks in September . 
its committees sat the two weeks prior to that . 
therefore , we have been at work , but I am not sure that is the honourable senator ' s concern . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
i was there . 
senator Hays : 
on the issue of the work of the Senate , our objective today , on which I will comment under the next order of business , is to , as quickly as possible , see two committees of the Senate brought into existence - namely , the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications and the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
those committees will be sitting next week if they do come into existence and are struck . 
therefore , we will be at work in that respect . 
traditionally , the balance of committees has been the subject of some discussion between the government and the opposition side . 
there are issues that need to be discussed , and I say that , not so much as an excuse , but simply as an observation . 
for instance , I came to this position of Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate fairly recently . 
i have not had an opportunity to discuss with senators on this side the assignment to committees . 
inevitably , other issues , which I would rather not get into now , will arise in the course of those discussions with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and other honourable senators . 
accordingly , this period will be used , I hope profitably , to resolve those issues , and when we return , we will be in a position forthwith to vote the committees into existence . 
to the extent that we are unsuccessful , the Senate will help us to resolve them . 
however , I am optimistic that we shall be in full business mode the day after November 2 , and then the committees can meet , elect chairs and call their first meetings . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I wonder if I might speak now . 
this is an unusual day in that we do not have much business on the Orders of the Day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted for the Honourable Senator Hays to speak now ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Hays : 
i wish to ask if it would be in order to deal with the matters arising on the Order Paper under " Report of Committees " , the reports of the Selection Committee , and following them , the motions in respect of the terms of reference to be referred to the Foreign Affairs and Transport committees . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , when we proceed to Orders of the Day , the opposition agrees that that is a good suggestion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that when we reach the Orders of the Day , we will proceed in that manner ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association 
Canadian Delegation to Spring Session of North Atlantic Assembly Held in Warsaw , Poland - Report Tabled 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the first report of the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association which represented Canada at the spring session of the NATO Parliamentary Assembly held in Warsaw , Poland , May 27 to 31 , 1999 . 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 57 ( 2 ) , I give notice that at the next sitting of the Senate , I will call the attention of the Senate to the shelter strategy for aboriginal peoples . 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , before proceeding to Orders of the Day , I wonder if , during our break , His Honour could help clarify the situation we were in earlier . 
as I understand it , the Deputy Leader of the Government asked for leave to introduce an adjournment motion . 
leave was granted . 
then Senator Prud ' homme began discussing it and some of us felt it was a non - debatable matter because leave had been granted . 
the item was introduced under Routine Proceedings . 
i do not wish to debate the motion today , but it would be appreciated if we could have some clarification on when during Routine Proceedings debate is allowed , if it is at all . 
obviously , we know when it is not . 
i raise that issue in the hope that in the future we will not have to go through the confusing few minutes we did earlier . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i thank the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton for raising this matter . 
i assure him that the matter will be addressed . 
i have already asked the staff to review the precedents on this question . 
it is a matter on which we must be clear , and when we return I trust that we will have that information . 
committee of Selection 
first Report Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the first report of the Committee of Selection ( membership of Transport and Communications Committee ) , presented in the Senate on October 13 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Mercier ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move that this report be adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I would not have had to speak at all if we had had Senator Hays ' explanations right from the start . 
he has told us exactly what I wanted to hear , except that he did not tell us this in advance . 
i now have the assurance that the committees will be meeting next week . 
i hope that the Transport and Communications Committee that was struck yesterday will move on to selecting its chairman and will start work as early as next week . 
there are legal deadlines that have to be met on this very important question . 
i am calling upon not only the senators from Quebec but also those from Eastern Canada . 
the decision to be reached on the Onex project will impact heavily upon us . 
it does not affect only Quebec . I am not that narrow - minded . 
i am not parochial . 
i should hope that this committee will get its act together fast so that we can sit next week in order that we might have something to say prior to the Supreme Court decision which could affect the future of Air Canada . 
if there is something that should be close to the Liberal heart , it is Air Canada . 
in fact , he surprised himself when he later succeeded in having Trans - Canada Airlines transformed into Air Canada Airlines , which then became famous around the world . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
second Report Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Committee of Selection ( composition of the Foreign Affairs Committee ) , presented in the Senate on October 13 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Mercier ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of the report . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
i was a new senator . 
wait a minute , that is debatable . 
so I got up in front of this magnificent audience . 
to my surprise , no one left . 
everyone listened to my interpretation of that rule that day . 
i said that the Committee of Selection should remember that there are senators who came to the Senate in the hope of serving Canada well , including by sitting on committees . 
i prefer " non - aligned " . 
i choose to be non - aligned for the time being . 
the problem is growing because there are now five such senators , three of whom are very interested in working on committees . 
we have not solved the problem . 
we want to show the world how democracy works . 
we want to help to keep Canada together . 
we want to ensure that people understand what " First Nations " means . 
we want to show respect for minorities , religious or otherwise . 
yet , we cannot even decide what to do with five so - called independent senators . 
this is a shame . 
some hanky - panky has taken place over the past six years to avoid making a decision , although I will not give the names of the senators involved . 
i am not saying that non - aligned senators have more rights than Senators Lynch - Staunton , Kinsella and others . 
i am , however , saying that we have no less rights than Senators Carstairs , Graham and others . 
we are all equal , and that is the view of Senator Atkins and especially of Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
if senators are all equal , they should be given the opportunity to sit on committees . 
i do not say that they should be given first choice . 
i am ready to accept that I will not be given my first choice . 
i am secretly told by many here that I am right . 
i am giving notice , as the rules require . 
as His Honour knows , when I intend to do something , I do it . 
approximately five years ago , I reminded the committee of what took place . 
this year , I gave my word to some people here in the Senate that I would not repeat that performance , that I would not get up today and make a speech . 
i will not say that I was double - crossed , but it is close to that . 
i could not believe that simply saying " no " could attract so much attention . 
i had given my word that I would not speak that day , with the understanding that we would proceed yesterday . 
i thought that was fair so I accepted . 
let us look at what happened . 
the Committee of Selection selected members for two committees . 
my remarks are not directed at anyone personally , but I am tired of people who play games . 
some people will lose credibility . 
there was a fabulous article in Quorum yesterday written by a woman I have known for many years , Senator Finnerty , who is a new senator . 
in her article she said that she is proud to be in the Senate because she values Senate committee work and the detailed , scholarly reports generated . 
she quoted Senator Croll , Senator Davey , and others . 
she says that the Senate is all about committee work and continuity to serve Canada better . 
you will not hear this speech too often because I am getting sick and tired of it . 
if I am asked to go to work for the Government of Quebec , I will . 
i have better things to do than waste my time here . 
i came here because I believe that Canada is under attack . 
i came because I think we can show the rest of the world that we can make a difference . 
i hate the hypocrisy of saying that this is the best country in the world when those who are willing are not being allowed to work to maintain that reputation . 
i have an understanding of First Nations . 
it is not Quebec that will cause this country to explode , if it does explode . 
we must pay more attention to our First Nations . 
i am a close friend of the Nisga ' a in British Columbia and I will defend them here in debate . 
( 0940 ) 
honourable senators , what happened here on Tuesday ? 
a Committee of Selection was appointed . 
yesterday , I attended the first meeting of that committee expecting to hear that it would not be able to deal with the issue of independent senators , which is something I do not mind , for the time being . 
the members of the Committee of Selection can affect the life of a senator over the course of the next two years . 
it is an important committee because , technically speaking , these nine senators decide to which committees certain senators will be appointed . 
i arrived at the committee yesterday to find that one of the nine was not there . 
he had sent a substitute . 
honourable senators , I will not name names . 
do you not see how kind I am ? 
senators will have to do their own research to find who it was . 
if someone accepts a job , they do their job . 
females in the Senate have proven that they are much better at that than the majority of males in the Senate . 
i remember when the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs sat in February 1998 . Neither the Senate nor the House of Commons was sitting . 
three Liberals were in attendance at the committee - they were all women . 
the leadership of the Senate could not find a man to sit on the committee . 
i could take word for word what the Honourable Senator Carstairs said when she replied to my earlier question . 
i asked , " What were the criteria involved ? " 
she stated that she was the first to write about gender when she wrote a report on parliamentary associations in 1993 and that the delegations used to be completely male . 
on that note , I point out that I was replaced by Senator Finestone for a couple of years . 
however , I am still waiting to get back to my favourite association . 
honourable senators , I do not know how and when the chamber will make a decision on these two reports . 
every time a senator is stuck on television or stopped by a group of students , journalists or otherwise , what do we say ? 
it is something in which I believe . 
however , that should be the reality . 
i do not believe in substitution . 
if a senator accepts a position on a committee , then he or she should attend all the meetings of that committee . 
we are not members of the House of Commons where they say to people in the corridors , " Come to the committee today , and after two years of study , there will be a final vote in committee . " 
they do not even know on what they are voting , but they raise their hands when they see that those in the leadership are raising their hands . 
they have no knowledge of what took place . 
honourable senators , continuity and devotion are our buzzwords . 
we must put our heads together in the next two weeks to consider how to tackle the situation of independent senators . 
if that is not done , I will create my own committee of parliamentarians who are interested in world affairs . 
no one can deprive us of that . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of a delegation from the Senate of the Czech Republic . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Study Order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Air Canada 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 , moved : 
that , pursuant to subsection 47 ( 5 ) of the Canada Transportation Act , the order laid before this Chamber on September 14 , 1999 , authorizing certain major air carriers and persons to negotiate and enter into any conditional agreement , be referred for review to the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications ; 
that the Committee hear , amongst others , the Minister of Transport ; 
that the Committee have the power to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 . 
there is a reference to the committee . 
if they do , I will attempt to answer them . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , now that the names of committee members are in , the committee must convene an organizational meeting to elect a chairman and then meet to dispose of this order of reference . 
does the honourable senator know when the committee will be constituted so that it can start its work ? 
they now have the authority to start . 
that is why we came back and why we allow these two committees to work , the one run by the able chairman of Foreign Affairs and now this one , under whose direction remains to be seen . 
will that take place soon ? 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , the short answer is , " Yes. " 
it is my intention to do whatever I can to see that the committee meets to select a chair and commence its work , as early as later this day or certainly later this week . 
it has been drawn to my attention that , as our adjournment motion is for two weeks , we require a motion to ensure that the committee can sit while the Senate is not sitting . 
i will deal with that at the conclusion of Motions . 
motion agreed to . 
foreign affairs 
committee Authorized to Study Changing Mandate of North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of October 13 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be authorized to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada : 
2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member . 
that the papers and evidence received by the Committee on the subject of this reference during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; 
that the Committee have the power to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than November 18 , 1999 . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
this committee played a vital role . 
we all know the extraordinary ability and patience of the chairman , Senator Stewart . 
i regret that he will be leaving us in November . 
i wish to make certain that I am understood by another fine gentlemen whom I know very well , one I supported as secretary of the Liberal Party in the 1970 s . 
i am talking about Senator Lewis . 
when I talked about continuity on a committee and members who just jump in at the last minute , I did not have Senator Lewis in mind . 
we all know that Senator Whelan left us this summer because of retirement , so he had to be replaced . 
senator Lewis , whom we all know for his intelligence and ability as a great lawyer and judicious mind , has been chosen to finish that work . 
that is why , now that I am calmed down , I wish to make sure that I correct every step that I may have taken incorrectly . 
i did not have the Honourable Senator Lewis in mind when I discussed continuity and replacement of members . 
of course , someone had to replace Senator Whelan , and Senator Lewis was chosen . 
all the other members remain the same , and I am very happy . 
if I had been on that committee , I would have hoped that Senator Stewart would have been re - elected chairman , in order to finish his work , with Senator Andreychuk as deputy chair . 
that is why I gave my consent on Tuesday not to speak . 
we have invested hundreds of thousands of dollars in that committee to work on that study on our behalf - and I want all honourable senators to know that . 
it seems only natural that the members who worked on that study should be the same ones to terminate it . 
i do not know how you proceed in English . 
i was good in school at some matters and bad at others . 
i am told that I was very good at philosophy , particularly logic . 
senator Taylor should not laugh so much because I campaigned for him , too , in the worst year of his career in Alberta . 
i can go around here and name all those who helped . 
senator Taylor : 
that destroys your argument that you are logical . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
well , I thought I would convert you to my logic . 
i am very pleased that this committee has been constituted . 
i will attend , of course , as a volunteer , as much as I can . 
honourable senators , I have neither the authority nor the arrogance to give advice to the committee , but I hope that this committee will have all the time necessary because it is difficult work . 
i hope that we will not be rising in the middle of November to ask for an extension under another chairman who will have to start all the work again . 
i hope that the committee will take all the time necessary to finish its work so that this will become the coronation of Honourable Senator Stewart ' s long service to the Senate . 
to facilitate the committee ' s work , I will sit down now so that the committee can have a meeting today . 
i could talk on every subject on the Order Paper this morning . 
we should never have a 9:00 a.m. meeting because I am near my best early in the morning and at my very best very late at night . 
i wish Senator Stewart luck in his work on our behalf , and I hope that the committee will have time to finish the work and to report back to the Senate under his name . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i think that it only logical that it be reintroduced . 
the committee has had many hearings with various government officials , has met with senior officers of the military , some of whom were in Bosnia , with various specialists in peacekeeping , with historians , with Canada ' s ambassador to NATO and many of his colleagues , both civilian and military . 
it has met with the recently departed Secretary General of NATO and other senior officials . 
it has accumulated a tremendous amount of research and intelligence , much of which will help in the final report . 
the key witnesses missing , by their being excluded in the terms of reference , are the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Minister of National Defence , and the Chief of Defence Staff , who are the most logical witnesses to call prior to winding up the hearings . 
i should therefore like to move an amendment which I hope will receive the support of this chamber . 
it would follow paragraph 2 in the terms before us . 
motion in Amendment 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
therefore , I move , seconded by Senator Kinsella : 
that the Committee hear , amongst others , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of Defence Staff . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion in amendment ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the aggressiveness of the motion as it stood in the last Parliament , according to Senator Lynch - Staunton , naming the ministers and other functionaries from whom the committee would wish to hear . 
it is not included in the present reference partly because of the time frame given to the committee to report and the availability of all of those ministers and others mentioned in the original order of reference . 
i will listen carefully to Senator Stewart ' s comments , but I believe that is the principle reason for the motion being as it is . 
of course , this does not mean that the committee cannot call these and other witnesses if it wishes to do so . 
i am not sure why the committee has not heard from them already , other than that their work was interrupted by the prorogation . 
i am not sure of the committee ' s intentions . 
i am hoping , as expressed by Senator Prud ' homme , that Senator Stewart will be elected chairman by the committee . 
i noticed that the committee intends to commence work as early as today . 
it may well be that all of those listed in the original reference will be called and heard . 
it may be that , for reasons beyond the control of the committee and the Senate , some of those named will be unavailable . 
it could cause a problem when we come to the November 18 reporting date , as I understand the Rules of the Senate . 
those are the reasons for the motion being in its present form . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , as the seconder of the main motion , I find this amendment to the main motion to be a good amelioration of the motion . 
i accept it as a friendly motion . 
it is not limiting but , rather , inviting the committee to hear , inter alia , from the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of the Defence Staff . 
given the work record of the committee during the previous session and the quality of work of the committee , I would be very surprised if the committee would not consider it necessary for the completion of their work to hear from those three personages in particular . 
i , too , look forward to hearing the comments of Senator Stewart . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , there is a presumption as to a decision concerning the committee ' s chair , to be made by the committee when it meets that may or may not be valid . 
however , let us put that aside . 
i agree with Senator Lynch - Staunton that the committee has done extremely intensive and valuable work . 
the work done in the last session certainly pointed to the necessity of hearing from the Minister of Foreign Affairs . 
it pointed , though perhaps less imperatively , to the need to hear from the Minister of National Defence . 
the same would apply in the case of the Chief of the Defence Staff . 
in other words , I agree entirely with the substance of Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s motion in amendment . 
i shall add another reason as to why I think these three should be heard by the committee . 
the Speech from the Throne , delivered earlier this week , creates almost a necessity that the ministers be heard . 
the Government will give increased prominence to human security in its foreign policy , working to achieve meaningful progress in the councils of the world on a global human security agenda . 
we have heard language like that before from the present Minister of Foreign Affairs , but now we have it from the Governor General speaking on behalf of the government . 
it is clear that the committee will need to hear from Mr. Axworthy when the committee gets to that phase of its work . 
another paragraph in the Speech from the Throne demands attention , and again I quote : 
the Government will also continue to ensure that the Canadian Forces have the capacity to support Canada ' s role in building a more secure world and will further develop the capacity of Canadians to help ensure peace and security in foreign lands . 
it seems to me that the person from whom the committee needs to hear on that topic is the Minister of National Defence and the appropriate person from the department . 
i cannot see how the committee can report without having heard these witnesses - certainly the two ministers . 
however , I cannot speak for the committee . 
i then come to the Honourable Senator Hays ' point . 
nevertheless , the date of November 18 is in the motion . 
the problem that confronts the government leadership in this house is that the Senate might very well be put in an impossible position or situation - on the one hand , an early deadline , and , on the other hand , an insistence that three particular officials be heard . 
if there is that insistence , the deadline should be regarded as flexible . 
otherwise , we may be in a bad jam . 
honourable senators , I believe it is the committee ' s intention to hear from at least the two ministers and probably the official to whom reference has been made . 
i do not think there is any question about that . 
in a sense , the problem confronting us is one of form , namely , can we do it in the time available ? 
if that provision is in there , it may well be that the committee will need to seek an extension beyond November 18 . 
that is the situation as I understand it , honourable senators . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I should like to take a moment to speak in support of the motion in amendment from the other side . 
to ask the committee to make a report without the input of the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of Defence Staff - Senator Stewart , being an old Scotsman , would understand - would be like eating porridge without any salt . 
as one who took umbrage at the actions in Kosovo earlier this year , it is important to understand the reasoning behind our role in foreign affairs and our reasoning in the future . 
honourable senators , I recently gave a speech on behalf of the Honourable David Kilgour , Secretary of State for Latin America and Africa , to a graduate class of political scientists in Calgary . 
Mr. Kilgour allowed me the freedom to use my own words . 
i took the liberty of speaking along the lines of what Senator Stewart has already mentioned - namely , that the future is empowered much more in personal or human security than it is in national security . 
most of the wars fought in the last 20 years have been civil wars , not one state against another . 
it is almost like an Order in Council ; we commit our soldiers . 
in the case of Kosovo , where is the logic in committing our services to bomb innocent women and children merely because they elect the wrong person to lead the government ? 
i know that I am using this opportunity to reopen the issue of Kosovo , but I do not apologize for that . 
although I am not a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee , I do plan to attend sometimes and ask questions of the various witnesses . 
with an issue as important as the army being used to perform police actions without parliamentary approval , why should that not be looked at closely ? 
the deadline of November 18 is completely artificial . 
i support the motion in amendment wholeheartedly . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I believe the motion in amendment would help the committee because it would show the will of the Senate to encourage the ministers to come to the committee . 
i fully appreciate the difficulty a chairman may have in asking ministers to testify during busy schedules , but if it is in the mandate , it strengthens the chairman ' s hand . 
if there is a compelling reason a minister or the Chief of Defence Staff cannot appear before the committee , as we have intended to call them , what to do should be left to the discretion of the committee at that point . 
should we come back for an extension of our mandate , or are we relieved of that term in our report ? 
i believe that is the way to deal with the issue . 
i happen to like the words in the mandate because they strengthen the chairman ' s hand . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , having listened to the debate , we on this side will accept the amendment that the committee hear those additional witnesses . 
on the issue of the reporting date , as a committee chairman , I never had a problem coming back to this chamber to ask for an extension of time to deal with a reference , and I am sure that will be the case for the Foreign Affairs Committee if it needs an extension . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , we are in the same position now as we were in 1984 when it was the wish of the government to create a peace and security institute . 
everyone said it was impossible . 
many people did not wish to create that peace and security institute because they said it was a gift to the departure of former prime minister Trudeau . 
i did not agree with that . 
i was chairman of the national defence and foreign affairs committees in the House of Commons at that time , and we had 30 members to organize . 
we went against the clock . 
by " against the clock " I mean that if we think this work is important , we will have to ask the members of the committee for extra work days . 
nothing ensures continuity better than sitting five days a week . 
if the committee sits only here and there , from experience we know that it will not have time to do all it has to do , such as drafting a report . 
arrogance is not a card I carry in my pocket , but I am not tutoring , either . 
under the leadership of the Honourable Senator Stewart , if services are concentrated , the committee could sit during the day and all the various documents could be produced and translated during the night . 
if there is a will , I am sure they can accomplish what Senator Lynch - Staunton has asked and what Senator Stewart wishes to accomplish . 
however , that cannot be done if the committee sits only two or three days a week or two afternoons . 
there is nothing wrong in starting Monday afternoon or Monday evening . 
i should like very much to see the deadline met so that this report will be the Stewart report . 
if the committee does not meet that deadline , then it will ask for an extension . 
in order to have something concrete in our hands , it would be a good idea to come up with a report by the deadline , if at all possible . 
only in the extreme case should the committee consider asking for an extension . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I seek leave to speak again to this matter . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i also wish to thank Senator Hays for giving the support of his side to this motion in amendment . 
i think he will find that the ministers and the Chief of Defence Staff will welcome an opportunity to appear before the committee . 
this is a non - partisan effort designed to help Canadians understand the new NATO , where Canada fits into it , and whether we have the resources to meet the obligations under the new NATO , which has evolved much more quickly and in a different direction than most of us realize . 
Kosovo was but one example . 
other examples may follow , which may be even worse . 
canada must know where it stands with the new NATO . 
i hope and expect that the ministers and the Chief of Defence Staff will welcome the opportunity to give us the government ' s views , which , in turn , can be helpful in the preparation of the report that is anxiously awaited by many , both in this country and elsewhere . 
i know that from discussions abroad I have had on this matter . 
the study will help many smaller countries determine their position as well . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , it was moved by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator Kinsella , that the motion be amended by adding after paragraph No. 2 the words : 
that the Committee hear , amongst others , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Minister of National Defence and the Chief of Defence Staff . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion in amendment ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
the question is now on the main motion . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion as amended agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Studythe Consequences of the European Monetary Union 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of October 13 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be authorized to examine and report on the consequences for Canada of the emerging European Monetary Union and on other related trade and investment matters ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and the work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 and that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
motion agreed to . 
business of the Senate 
committees Authorized to Meet During Adjournments 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , I move : 
that for the duration of the present session , any select committee may meet during adjournments of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 , at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 4 
Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
visitors in the Gallery 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Greg Moore 
tribute 
the Late Mwalimu Julius K . Nyerere Former President of the United Republic of Tanzania 
tribute 
women ' s History Month 
income Tax Policy for Woodlot Owners 
the Late Claude Masson 
tribute 
national Defence 
recognition of Peacekeeping Efforts Abroad 
official Languages 
change to Tabling Date of Commissioner ' s Annual Report 
the Crime of Human Trafficking 
osteoporosis Month 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privacy Commissioner 
annual Report Tabled 
clerk of the Senate 
annual Accounts Tabled 
foreign Affairs 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
consequences of European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee Requesting Authority to Engage Services Presented 
foreign Affairs 
committee of Selection 
third Report Presented 
clerk of the Senate 
annual Accounts Referred to Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration Committee 
adjournment 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Notice of Motion 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
first Reading 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
first Reading 
international Search or Seizure Bill 
first Reading 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
royal Assent Bill 
first Reading 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
criminal Code Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Senate 
report of Visiting Delegation to the Kyrgyz Republic Tabled 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
review of Anti - Drug Policy 
notice of Motion to Form Special Senate Committee 
federalism and Globalization 
notice of Inquiry 
review of Canadian Environmental Protection Act 
notice of Motion 
office of Children ' s Environmental Health 
notice of Motion to Establish 
national Defence 
notice of Motion to Establish Special Senate Committee to Examine Conduct of Personnel in Relation to the Somalia Deployment and the Destruction of Medical Records of Personnel Serving in Croatia 
financing of Post - Secondary Education 
notice of Inquiry 
conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life 
notice of Inquiry 
distinguished Canadians and their Involvement with the United Kingdom 
notice of Inquiry 
access to Census Information 
presentation of Petition 
business of the Senate 
question PERIOD 
canada Customs and Revenue Agency 
changes to National Child Tax Benefit - Effect on Recipients 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
west Nova Scotia Regiment - Appointment of Honorary Colonel 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Visit to Ottawa by Delegation - Discrepancy in Statistics 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Representations to Prime Minister 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Efficacy of Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance Program 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Visit to Ottawa by Delegation - Discrepancy in Statistics 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Economic Effects of Decline in Farm Income 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possible Program for Farm Credit 
library of Parliament Official Languages Scrutiny of Regulations 
standing Joint Committees - Message from Commons 
speaker ' s Statement on the Effect of Granting Leave During Routine Proceedings and the Event of October 14 , 1999 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call Senators ' Statements , I wish to draw your attention to distinguished visitors in the gallery . 
we have with us a delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia , led by Dr. Janez Podobnik , Speaker of the National Assembly , and accompanied by His Excellency Dr. Bozo Cerar , Ambassador of the Republic of Slovenia to Canada . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish you welcome here in the Senate of Canada . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , our other distinguished visitor in the gallery today is Senator John Watson of Australia , Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Superannuation . 
welcome to the Senate of Canada , Senator Watson . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Greg Moore 
tribute 
hon. Ross Fitzpatrick : 
honourable senators , I rise today to pay tribute to Greg Moore , the 24 - year - old race car driver who died Sunday after his car crashed during a race in California . 
Greg was born and raised in Maple Ridge , British Columbia , and was one of the leading motorists on the CART or Indy car circuit . 
in 1997 , at the age of 22 , he became the youngest person ever to win a CART race . 
sadly , he had much more ahead of him . 
Greg offered more than his accomplishments on the track by giving back to his community . 
he participated in numerous charitable events and was a bright and articulate spokesman for various causes . 
his enthusiasm for helping others was genuine . 
a fund established in his name will continue to lend support to charities he supported . 
honourable senators , Canadians will not soon forget Greg Moore . 
the Late Mwalimu Julius K . Nyerere Former President of the United Republic of Tanzania 
tribute 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , in 1966 , I was offered a position as assistant dean at the law school in Dar es Salaam , Tanzania . 
i declined the offer and opted to remain in Canada and subsequently became a partner in the largest law firm in Atlantic Canada . 
had I taken that position and gone to Tanzania , I would have witnessed the democratic miracle orchestrated by Julius Nyerere , who led his country to independence from Britain in 1961 and served as the first president of Tanzania from 1962 to 1985 . 
he was loved and revered the world over for his integrity , modesty and intelligence . 
he was considered to be one of Africa ' s greatest statesmen , on a par with Nelson Mandela , and ranks among the most eminent leaders of the 20 th century . 
Julius Nyerere was educated as a teacher . 
he entered politics in 1954 and founded the Tanganyika African National Union . 
he became the colony ' s chief minister when TANU won the elections in 1960 . 
Nyerere continued as prime minister when Tanganyika became independent in 1961 , but he resigned early in 1962 to concentrate on restructuring TANU for its post - independence role . 
elections in 1962 brought him back as president of a republic . 
he was committed to African liberation , and he offered sanctuary in Tanzania to members of the African National Congress and numerous other rebel - led groups from Zimbabwe , Mozambique , Angola and Uganda . 
a strong supporter of indigenous African culture , Nyerere ' s most miraculous achievement was bringing ethnic union to Tanzania . 
in a tribute to Nyerere on CBC Radio ' s " As It Happens , " Stephen Lewis , who served with the United Nations in Africa and was a friend of the former president , marvelled at how Nyerere " took a country divided on tribal lines and turned everyone into a ` Tanzanian ' . " 
he achieved this by establishing strong systems of education and health and through the implementation of a common language . 
to see what ethnic division could do - the mass killings and destruction of a people and a country . 
when Nyerere spoke about Rwanda and offered assistance to its people , he did so with " immense feeling , pain and understanding . " 
were it not for his vision and leadership , Tanzania could have been the site of similar horrors . 
on October 20 , hundreds of thousands of Tanzanians began gathering at dawn and soon filled the streets of the capital Dar es Salaam to pay their last respects to a man known throughout Tanzania as " teacher " . 
huge yet peaceful crowds lined the road from the airport to Mr. Nyerere ' s home in the suburbs , wailing as his coffin was driven past . 
Julius Nyerere was given a state funeral ceremony in Tanzania on Thursday , October 21 . 
he was a man of tremendous vision and principle who will be missed by many . 
honourable senators , Mary Lou Findley summed it up nicely at the end of the CBC tribute by saying that Nyerere may have been from a small country , but he was not a small man . 
i second Stephen Lewis ' final words that Julius Nyerere was " a lovely , lovely man . " 
women ' s History Month 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , October is Women ' s History Month . 
it is an excellent opportunity to pay tribute to the progress that has been made so far , and to look at the obstacles that still lie ahead of us . 
we owe a great deal to the Famous Five who fought long and hard to make our presence in this chamber possible . 
it has been 70 years since we won the right to be considered persons . 
while I try not to think of what it was we were considered before becoming persons , I do know that being a person is still not as good as being a man . 
the number of women in this chamber and elsewhere is a source of encouragement to me . 
their drive , their determination , their intelligence , their spirit , are a huge contribution to our country . 
yet we cannot forget that we are still so few in numbers . 
in this chamber , we are outnumbered two to one . 
while rejoicing in the fact that the Canadian Senate ranks fifth in the world as far as female representation is concerned , we can certainly not settle for the status quo . 
there are still many obstacles to women ' s participation in so many aspects of our economic and political life . 
i have made reference here and elsewhere on numerous occasions to the difficulties women face when they enter politics . 
yet without sufficient representation by women and other groups in our political institutions , how can we boast that we are a democracy ? 
as we commemorate the Persons Case , and celebrate all that it has meant to generations of Canadians , we must be aware that our goal has not yet been attained . 
if the Famous Five were with us now , they would still be battling for equality . 
today distinctions are still being made between people : men and women , rich and poor , young and old , majority and minority . 
the figures on representation in this place and the other will continue to reflect these distinctions until such time as there is acceptance of the fact that a person is a person and nothing else , nothing more , and nothing less . 
income Tax Policy for Woodlot Owners 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I wish to bring to your attention the concerns of Canadian woodlot owners with the present income tax policy and their need for prompt and appropriate changes to the act . 
in my home province of New Brunswick , one family in six owns a woodlot . 
there are approximately 425,000 family - owned woodlots in Canada . 
in many provinces they provide an essential part of the raw material needed to operate sawmills and pulpmills . 
most woodlot owners respect and care for their land so that it contributes not only to pleasant roadside scenery and habitat for wildlife , but as timber for industry and employment in Canada ' s many small rural communities . 
caring for woodlots in this way is a mammoth undertaking . 
growing a tree from a seedling to maturity takes a long time , at least 40 years in most parts of the country . 
one way in which the federal government can encourage the promotion and enhancement of forest management activities is through sound income tax policies . 
when Canadians spend money to start a new business , they are able to deduct losses in the early years against other sources of income as long as they can demonstrate to Revenue Canada that they are building their new business with " a reasonable expectation of profit . " 
this is not the case with woodlot owners . 
when a family farm is passed on from one generation to another , the capital gains tax is deferred as long as the family is actively managing the farm . 
when a woodlot is passed on , a substantial tax bill often goes with it . 
if the new owners do not have a ready source of cash with which to pay the bill , they may be forced to get the cash from the woodlot , and often that may mean clearing the land . 
why are woodlot owners being treated differently from other Canadians ? 
the reason seems to be that the Income Tax Act is written in such a way that a business which may take up to 40 years to produce a profit simply falls through the cracks . 
the Income Tax Act is not equipped to recognize the realities of forest management practices and the time frames that are involved in profitable woodlot businesses . 
woodlot owner organizations have been working on this issue since 1988 . 
they now report that the resistance to change they experienced in the early years has been replaced by a reasonable understanding of the issues within the Department of Finance and the Department of National Revenue . 
the issue has been thoroughly reviewed by a number of House of Commons committees , the National Round Table on Environment and Economy and , most recently , our own subcommittee studying the boreal forest . 
honourable senators , we need the cooperation of woodlot owners to meet our nation ' s commitment to the Kyoto Protocol and to the announced endangered species legislation , and the woodlot owners need a sound tax policy as one of the tools available to help them plant more trees and increase their efforts to manage their land . 
surely , it is time this problem was fixed . 
i urge the Minister of Finance to complete this job . 
the Late Claude Masson 
tribute 
hon. Fernand Roberge : 
Claude was a simple man , at ease with himself , a man of equanimity and respected by his peers . 
he was also a man of faith , socially committed , a professional , in short , an exemplary individual . 
his death is a great loss for La Presse and the journalistic community in Quebec , and for society as a whole . 
we offer our condolences to his family and to the families of the others lost in this terrible accident . 
national Defence 
recognition of Peacekeeping Efforts Abroad 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , I found it strange that on his first official visit to Canada , Lord George Robertson , the new Secretary - General of NATO , criticized Canada ' s military spending while apparently ignoring the fact that Canada now has more troops serving the interests of peace across the world than at any other time since the Korean War . 
Canadian peacekeeping is one of the world ' s most pre - eminent and effective conflict management agencies . 
in this month of November , let us especially honour the dedication and achievements of the 108 Canadian peacekeepers who have lost their lives in the service of international peace and security over the past four decades . 
they have made a priceless contribution to the alleviation of human suffering . 
Canadians understand that peacekeeping upholds who and what we are as a nation . 
we must appreciate the role of our forces in advancing our interests abroad , however we choose to define them . 
stretched beyond belief , away from their families for prolonged periods of time , Canada ' s peacekeeping forces are deployed in order to effect real change and to ensure the promotion and maintenance of real human security . 
Canadians have fought and died in defence of human security and freedom . 
our ongoing pursuit of human security honours their sacrifice and is confirmation of a noble tradition . 
our peacekeepers deserve nothing less . 
honourable senators , in spending money for reconstruction in the war - torn Balkans , and for other world efforts to rebuild societies from the consequences of war , Canada takes a back seat to no one . 
in combat operations , it is not that Canada is spending too little ; it is that other countries , including NATO leaders , are spending too much . 
official Languages 
change to Tabling Date of Commissioner ' s Annual Report 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , on October 4 , the Commissioner of Official Languages , in a letter to our Speaker , expressed his intention to delay the tabling of his annual report so as to cover the fiscal year from now on rather than the calendar year . 
the Official Languages Act is not clear on the terms of tabling the annual report . 
however , section 37 of the Interpretation Act provides that a year cover a full 12 - month period . 
this decision will deprive minority language communities and the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages of the House of Commons and the Senate of a report that is a valuable and vital tool . 
the Crime of Human Trafficking 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , throughout the world people are being abducted , coerced , tricked and sold into what is popularly being termed " the global slave trade . " 
victims are usually women , girls and boys who are forced into sexually and economically exploitive situations for the profit of recruiters , traffickers and crime syndicates . 
in 1997 , the United Nations estimated that 4 million people were trafficked worldwide - the net profit : up to $ 7 billion annually . 
canada is not immune from such activities . 
last fall , a sex ring made up of Asian women was discovered in Toronto , amongst others . 
human trafficking , along with the many activities that surround this type of crime , such as prostitution , forcible confinement and assault , are all illegal activities within Canada . 
despite international conventions outlawing the human slave trade , this type of criminal activity is increasing . 
part of the increase is explained by the relative ease of human trafficking . 
often , the people being trafficked do not realize they are in danger and voluntarily cross the border into another country . 
law enforcement officials are less likely to make arrests in instances of human trafficking as compared to cases of drugs and arms smuggling . 
tragically , the premium that is placed on youth ensures that there is a constant demand to recruit new and younger women and children . 
human trafficking is a security risk because the profits made from human exploitation are frequently used to fund crime syndicates . 
in the Mekong region of Asia , human trafficking now rivals the drug trade for the attention of organized crime . 
likewise , in other unstable areas , such as in the former Soviet Union , women and children are particularly vulnerable to being trafficked . 
canada must work to prevent organizations from using Canada as a fundraising locale for criminal activity . 
in 1949 , the United Nations General Assembly approved the Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others . 
canada has not yet ratified this convention , despite it coming into play in 1949 . 
June 2000 will mark the fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration . 
one of the strategic objects of the Beijing Platform of Action is to eliminate trafficking in women and assist victims of violence due to prostitution and trafficking . 
it is essential for Canada to consider the ratification and enforcement of this international convention . 
to do otherwise would be to fail in our support of the United Nations and , more important , to fail in our support of those millions at risk . 
i urge the Government of Canada and members of the Senate to ensure that Canada ratifies this treaty before the fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration . 
osteoporosis Month 
hon. Vivienne Poy : 
honourable senators , November is Osteoporosis Month in Canada . 
osteoporosis is a debilitating condition that causes bones to thin and weaken , leaving them vulnerable to fracture . 
the prevalence of the disease among our citizens is a matter of great consequence and importance to this country . 
approximately 1.4 million Canadians currently suffer from osteoporosis , and another 2 million are at risk of developing the disease . 
it afflicts one in four women over the age of 50 and one in eight men in the same age group . 
treating osteoporosis costs Canada $ 1.3 billion a year . 
osteoporosis is a disease in which education and prevention can make a profound difference . 
because of a lack of public awareness and education , many people do not know they have the disease until it is too late . 
loss of bone density can occur silently over many years before it becomes evident . 
by the time bone fractures occur , the damage is already severe and can result in serious spine , hip and wrist injuries . 
much of the damage is irreversible . 
osteoporosis - related injuries are commonly disabling and diminish the quality of life significantly among those afflicted . 
today , we know more than ever about preventing osteoporosis , and the disease is internationally recognized as a significant health issue . 
building strong bones early in life is one of the most important things we can do . 
ensuring that we have enough calcium in our diets is also important , as well as regular exercise , especially weight - bearing sports like walking , running , tennis and badminton . 
there are now tests available for early detection for those at risk . 
we can significantly reduce the number of people who will develop osteoporosis if preventive measures and public education are undertaken . 
canada needs to show leadership by developing a comprehensive framework for the prevention , diagnosis and treatment of this debilitating disease . 
the kind of leadership I am talking about is consistent with the strategy outlined in the Throne Speech last month calling for the establishment of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research . 
these institutes are to bring together researchers who have an impact on health and to undertake shared research priorities . 
osteoporosis needs to be among our health research priorities if we are to improve the quality of life of Canadians , especially in the face of an ageing population in the coming decades . 
the incidence of osteoporosis can be greatly reduced if we take a long - term view of prevention . 
honourable senators , in the spirit of raising awareness of this important health issue , I invite all of you , along with our colleagues in the other place , to join me and the Osteoporosis Society of Canada tomorrow afternoon between 4 and 6 p.m. in Room 237 - C here in the Centre Block for a bone china tea . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
privacy Commissioner 
annual Report Tabled 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the annual report of the Privacy Commissioner for the period ended March 31 , 1999 . 
clerk of the Senate 
annual Accounts Tabled 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to inform the Senate that , pursuant to rule 133 of the Rules of the Senate , the Clerk of the Senate has laid on the Table a detailed statement of his receipts and disbursements for the fiscal year 1998 - 99 . 
foreign Affairs 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
consequences of European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee Requesting Authority to Engage Services Presented 
hon. John B . Stewart , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , in accordance with rule 86 ( 1 ) ( h ) to examine and report on the consequences for Canada of the emerging European Monetary Union and on other related trade and investment matters respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of such study . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration and the report thereon of that Committee are appended to this report , 
respectfully submitted , 
JOHN B . STEWART 
chairman 
( for text of Appendix , see today ' s Journals of the Senate , Appendix " A " p . 72 . 
) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Stewart , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
foreign Affairs 
changing Mandate of North Atlantic Treaty Organization - Budget Report of Committeeon Study Presented 
hon. John B . Stewart , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , in accordance withrule 86 ( 1 ) ( h ) to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada : 
1 . of the changed mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and Canada ' s role in NATO since the demise of the Warsaw Pact , the end of the Cold War and the recent addition to membership in NATO of Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic ; and 
2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary , and to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such study . 
pursuant to Section 2:07 of the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , the budget submitted to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration and the report thereon of that Committee are appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
JOHN B . STEWART 
chairman 
( for text of Appendix , see today ' s Journals of the Senate , Appendix " B " p . 78 . 
) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Stewart , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
committee of Selection 
third Report Presented 
hon. L é once Mercier , Chairman of the Committee of Selection , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 
the Committee of Selection has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
pursuant to rule 85 ( 1 ) ( a ) and 85 ( 2 ) of the Rules of the Senate , your Committee wishes to inform the Senate that it has met on the issue of nominating a senator to preside as Speaker pro tempore . 
your Committee has not decided on a nomination and will report to the Senate at a later time . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Mercier , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
clerk of the Senate 
annual Accounts Referred to Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration Committee 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Notice of Motion 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the proceedings on the Order of the Day for resuming the debate on the motion for an Address in reply to Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne addressed to both Houses of Parliament be concluded on the eighth sitting day on which the order is debated . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
first Reading 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) presented Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
international Search or Seizure Bill 
first Reading 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin presented Bill S - 4 , to provide for judicial preauthorization of requests to be made to a foreign or international authority or organization for a search or seizure outside Canada . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Nolin , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday , November 4 , 1999 . 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein presented Bill S - 5 , to amend the Parliament of Canada Act ( Parliamentary Poet Laureate ) . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Grafstein , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to introduce for first reading Bill S - 6 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters . 
this was formerly Bill S - 17 , which died on the Order Paper at the termination of the previous session of Parliament . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 57 ( 1 ) ( f ) , I move that the bill be placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
No. Could I ask why leave is required ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
there is no agreement . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I am curious . 
i am prepared to give agreement if I can know why . 
when sponsors of a bill ask for leave of the Senate , senators should know for what reason leave is being requested . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Cools , I am sorry , but there can be no debate on the motion . 
however , if yours is a question of information , that is a legitimate point , if the Senate so agrees . 
we have experienced this problem before - a senator asking for leave and another honourable senator wanting to know why . 
honourable senators , is it your wish that the question be asked ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Oliver : 
a number of witnesses were heard and evidence was taken . 
i should like to be in a position to speak to whether that evidence can be accepted as having been heard already as part of the consideration on the bill I just presented . 
i should like to do that tomorrow . 
senator Cools : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Oliver , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 57 ( 1 ) ( f ) , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
royal Assent Bill 
first Reading 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) presented Bill S - 7 , respecting the declaration of Royal Assent by the Governor General in the Queen ' s name to bills passed by the Houses of Parliament . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall the bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Ron Ghitter presented Bill S - 8 , to amend the Immigration Act . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Ghitter , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 . 
criminal Code Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 247 , to amend the Criminal Code and the Corrections and Conditional Release Act ( cumulative sentences ) . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , November 9 , 1999 . 
the Senate 
report of Visiting Delegation to the Kyrgyz Republic Tabled 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Senate Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject - matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its meetings . 
review of Anti - Drug Policy 
notice of Motion to Form Special Senate Committee 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday , November 4 , 1999 , I will move : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to reassess Canada ' s anti - drug legislation and policies , to carry out a broad consultation of the Canadian public to determine the specific needs of various regions of the country , where social problems associated with the trafficking and use of illegal drugs are more in evidence , to develop proposals to disseminate information about Canada ' s anti - drug policy and , finally , to make recommendations for adoption of an anti - drug strategy developed by and for Canadians under which all levels of government will be encouraged to work closely together to reduce the harm associated with the use of illegal drugs . 
that , without being limited in its mandate by the following , the Committee be authorized to : 
- review the federal government ' s policy on illegal drugs in Canada , its effectiveness , and the extent to which it is fairly enforced ; 
- develop a national harm reduction policy in order to lessen the negative impact of illegal drugs in Canada , and make recommendations regarding the enforcement of this policy , specifically the possibility of focusing on use and abuse of drugs as a social and health problem ; 
- study harm reduction models adopted by other countries and determine if there is a need to implement them wholly or partially in Canada ; 
- examine Canada ' s international role and obligations under United Nations conventions on narcotics and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other related treaties in order to determine whether these treaties authorize it to take action other than laying criminal charges and explore various options available at the international level ; 
- explore the effects of cannabis on health and examine whether alternative policy on cannabis would lead to increased harm in the short and long term . 
- examine the possibility of the government using its regulatory power under the Contraventions Act as an additional means of implementing a harm reduction policy , as is done in other jurisdictions ; 
- examine any other issue respecting Canada ' s anti - drug policy that the Committee considers appropriate to the completion of its mandate . 
that the Special Committee be composed of five Senators and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have the power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses , to report from time to time and to print such papers , briefs and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the briefs received and testimony heard during consideration of Bill C - 8 , An Act respecting the control of certain drugs , their precursors and other substances , by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during the Second Session of the Thirty - fifth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee have the power to authorize television , radio and electronic broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee be granted leave to sit when the Senate has been adjourned pursuant to subsection 95 ( 2 ) of the Senate Rules ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report not later than three years from the date of its being constituted . 
federalism and Globalization 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , November 9 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the major principles of modern federalism , in light of the discussions that took place during the Forum of Federations . 
review of Canadian Environmental Protection Act 
notice of Motion 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Senate urge the government to begin immediately its review of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act and to designate the first phase of that review to the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources . 
office of Children ' s Environmental Health 
notice of Motion to Establish 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Senate urge the government to establish an Office of Children ' s Environmental Health , an arm ' s - length agency to promote the protection of children from environmental hazards . 
national Defence 
notice of Motion to Establish Special Senate Committee to Examine Conduct of Personnel in Relation to the Somalia Deployment and the Destruction of Medical Records of Personnel Serving in Croatia 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on November 16 , 1999 , I will move : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to examine and report on two significant matters which involve the conduct of chain of command of the Canadian Forces , both in - theatre and at National Defence Headquarters and its response to operational , decision - making and administrative problems encountered during the Somalia deployment to the extent that these matters have not been examined by the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces to Somalia and allegations that Canadian soldiers were exposed to toxic substances in Croatia between 1993 and 1995 , and the alleged destruction of medical records of personnel serving in Croatia . 
that the Committee in examining these issues may call witnesses from whom it believes it may obtain evidence relevant to these matters including but not limited to : 
the present Minister of Defence in relation to both matters ; 
2 . Former Ministers of National Defence in relation to both matters ; 
4 . The then Acting Chief of Staff of the Minister of National Defence in relation to the Somalia occurrence ; 
6 . The then special advisor to the Minister of National Defence ( J . 
Dixon ) in relation to the Somalia occurrence ; 
7 . The persons occupying the position of Judge Advocate General during the relevant period in relation to the Somalia occurrence ; 
8 . The then Deputy Judge Advocate General ( litigation ) in relation to the Somalia occurrence ; and 
9 . The then Chief of Defence Staff and Deputy Chief of Defence Staff in relation to both occurrences . 
that seven senators , nominated by the Committee of Selection , act as members of the Special Committee , and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses under oath , to report from time to time and to print such papers and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by Committee ; 
that the Committee have power to authorize television and radio broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee have the power to engage the services of such counsel and other professional , technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purposes of its examination ; 
that the political parties represented on the Special Committee be granted allocations for expert assistance with the work of the Committee . 
that it be empowered to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada . 
that the Committee have the power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate . 
that the Committee submit its report not later than one year from the date of it being constituted , provided that , if the Senate is not sitting , the report will be deemed submitted on the day such report is deposited with the Clerk of the Senate . 
financing of Post - Secondary Education 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 , I shall call the attention of the Senate to the financing of post - secondary education in Canada , and particularly that portion of the financing that is borne by students , with a view to developing policies that will address and alleviate the debt load which post - secondary students are being burdened with in Canada . 
conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to my recent participation respecting the seventieth anniversary of the " Persons Case " at a conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life in Canada and the United Kingdom , held on October 21 and 22 , 1999 , in London , England . 
distinguished Canadians and their Involvement with the United Kingdom 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 56 ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) and 57 ( 2 ) , of the Rules of the Senate , I give notice that Thursday next , November 4 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate : 
( a ) to persons of Canadian birth who sat as members of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom , including Ontario - born Edward Blake , Liberal Minister of Justice of Canada 1875 - 1877 , also leader of the Liberal Party of Canada 1880 - 1887 , and New Brunswick - born The Right Honourable Bonar Law , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 1922 - 1923 , and Ontario - born Sir Bryant Irvine , Deputy Speaker of House of Commons of the United Kingdom 1976 - 1982 ; 
( b ) to persons of Canadian birth who sat as members of the House of Lords of the United Kingdom , including the Right Honourable Richard B . Bennett , Prime Minister of Canada 1930 - 1935 , and Lord Beaverbrook , Cabinet Minister in the United Kingdom in 1918 and 1940 - 1942 ; 
( c ) to persons of British birth born in the United Kingdom or the Dominions and Colonies , who have served in the Senate and House of Commons of Canada , including the Right Honourable John Turner , Prime Minister of Canada 1984 , also Liberal Leader of the Opposition 1984 - 1990 , and myself , a sitting black female senator born in the British West Indies ; 
( d ) to persons of Canadian citizenship who were members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom , including the Prime Ministers of Canada , the Supreme Court of Canada Chief Justices , and some Cabinet Ministers of Canada , including the Leader of the Government in the Senate 1921 - 1930 , and 1935 - 1940 , the Right Honourable Senator Raoul Dandurand , appointed to the United Kingdom Privy Council in 1941 ; 
( e ) to the 1919 Nickle Resolution , a motion of only the House of Commons of Canada for an address to His Majesty King George V and to Prime Minister Richard B . Bennett ' s 1934 words in the House of Commons characterizing this Resolution that : 
that was as ineffective in law as it is possible for any group of words to be . 
it was not only ineffective , but I am sorry to say , it was an affront to the sovereign himself . 
every constitutional lawyer , or anyone who has taken the trouble to study this matter realizes that that is what was done ; 
( f ) to the words of Prime Minister R . B . Bennett in a 1934 letter to J . R . MacNicol , MP , that : 
so long as I remain a citizen of the British Empire and a loyal subject of the King , I do not propose to do otherwise than assume the prerogative rights of the Sovereign to recognize the services of his subjects . 
( g ) to the many distinguished Canadian who have received honours since 1919 from the King or Queen of Canada , including the knighting in 1934 of Sir Lyman Duff , Supreme Court of Canada Chief Justice , and in 1935 of Sir Ernest MacMillan , musician , and in 1986 , Sir Bryant Irvine , parliamentarian , and in 1994 , Sir Neil Shaw , industrialist , and in 1994 , Sir Conrad Swan , advisor to Prime Minister Lester Pearson on the National Flag of Canada ; 
( h ) to the many distinguished Canadians who have received 646 orders and distinctions from foreign non - British , non - Canadian sovereigns between 1919 and February 1929 ; 
( i ) to the legal and constitutional position of persons of Canadian birth and citizenship , in respect of their ability and disability of their membership in the United Kingdom House of Lords and House of Commons , particularly Canadians domiciled in the United Kingdom holding dual citizenship of Canada and of the United Kingdom ; 
( j ) to the legal and constitutional position of Canadians at home and abroad in respect of entitlement to receive honours and distinctions from their own Sovereign , Queen Elizabeth II of Canada , and to the position in respect of their entitlement to receive honours and distinctions from sovereigns other than their own , including from the sovereign of France , the honour , the Ordre Royale de la L é gion d ' Honneur ; 
( k ) to those honours , distinctions , and awards that are not hereditary in character such as life peerages , knighthoods , military and chivalrous orders ; and 
( l ) to the recommendation by the United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II for the appointment to the House of Lords as a non - hereditary peer and lord of Mr. Conrad Black , a distinguished Canadian publisher , entrepreneur and also the Honorary Colonel of the Governor General ' s Foot Guards of Canada . 
access to Census Information 
presentation of Petition 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present a petition with 100 signatures from the Ontario Genealogical Society petitioning the following , in part : 
... your petitioners call upon Parliament to enact legislation to preserve the post - 1901 Census Records , remove them to the National Archives and make these , as well as future census records , available to the public after 92 years as is presently consistent with the many provisions of the privacy legislation and time limits now in force . 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , later I will be making a statement on a point of order raised by Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton the other day . 
however , I want to take this opportunity to point out one of the problems we have with our rules . 
however , I do not believe that this is the wish of the Senate . 
i simply make the point that these anomalies in our rules must be corrected . 
question PERIOD 
canada Customs and Revenue Agency 
changes to National Child Tax Benefit - Effect on Recipients 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last spring I drew to the Senate ' s attention a flaw in the way that the National Child Tax Benefit is structured in the case of modest income families with more than three children . 
for the benefit of the government leader I will restate the problem . 
in 2001 , the government will phase out the National Child Tax Benefit at a clawback rate of 11 per cent for one - child families , 19.7 per cent for two - child families and 27.6 per cent for families with three or more children . 
let us consider what happens when a single mother in Halifax , Nova Scotia , with four children and earning $ 30,000 of family income , is offered $ 100 to work overtime after the latest changes are fully in effect in the year 2001 . 
honourable senators , I will read you some figures . 
i have already given a copy to the honourable leader so he can follow it . 
then we have the income tested tax credits . 
honourable senators , the Throne Speech announced a $ 2 billion expansion of the National Child Benefit , with details to follow . 
can the Leader of the Government advise us as to whether or not the government intends to take a serious look at the way the various taxes and clawbacks all add up before it comes out with a final package of changes to the National Child Benefit ? 
can the government leader assure the Senate that this serious inequality , particularly to the people of Nova Scotia , will be addressed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate Senator Oliver giving me a copy of his calculations shortly before I entered the chamber . 
i know that the honourable senator is very interested in addressing the specific example that he has presented . 
i was happy to hear the senator mention that the Child Tax Benefit has been increased by $ 2 billion annually in recent budgets and will provide close to $ 7 billion annually in assistance to families by July 2000 . 
the honourable senator acknowledged that , and he and I both agree that it is an important and substantial measure undertaken by the government . 
i might also add that for a two - child family , the maximum benefit of $ 3,750 represents an increase of 48 per cent over the maximum benefit in 1996 . 
i know the honourable senator is pleased with the progress we have made . 
honourable senators , I certainly will be interested in discussing the specific example . 
i am confident that the government will take into account all the factors he has mentioned . 
with relation to this particular example , I will seek information from the various parties , and I assure the senator that his concern will be relayed to the appropriate authorities . 
senator Oliver : 
the honourable minister certainly would agree with me that , with respect to the example of a mother of four children who tries to make an extra $ 100 and is only left with $ 16.84 , something must be done by the government in the hope of eliminating some of the clawbacks . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would agree with the honourable senator . 
we certainly do not want to discourage a single mother of four children in those circumstances from earning an additional $ 100 . 
for all of the individual items that were mentioned , such as Canada Pension , I wonder if those deductions would apply at any income level or would there be a maximum beyond which they would not apply ? 
i do not pretend to be an expert on this , and that is why I would like to have an opportunity to discuss it with those more knowledgeable . 
i can certainly agree with the spirit of what the honourable senator brings to the floor . 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , I direct my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , to whom I extend congratulations on his appointment and best wishes . 
on April 19 last , the Government of Canada , in its response to the report of the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Trade , pledged to work with the New Agenda Coalition in pursuing nuclear disarmament goals and objectives . 
on October 26 , the New Agenda Coalition introduced a resolution in the First Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations which 
... calls upon the nuclear - weapon States to make an unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the speedy and total elimination of their nuclear arsenals and to engage without delay in an accelerated process of negotiations , thus achieving the nuclear disarmament , to which they are committed under Article VI of the NPT . 
before the minister responds , honourable senators , if I have leave , I will table in both official languages a copy of the New Agenda Coalition ' s resolution , which was presented in the first committee of the United Nations General Assembly on October 22 , 1999 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted for the tabling of the statement ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for that question . 
i certainly appreciate the comments made earlier by Senator Roche with respect to the role that Canada has played and continues to play in peacekeeping efforts around the world . 
i thought his comments were very timely . 
with respect to the specific question that the honourable senator posed , I am sure that the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Trade will , in the normal course of events , consider carefully the government ' s position and will , at the appropriate time , make it public . 
i would be happy to convey it at that time to the honourable senator . 
senator Roche : 
in my analysis of the text , I can find nothing that contravenes Canadian government policy . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would certainly be happy to consider the material that was tabled by the honourable senator and to bring his representations to the appropriate ministers . 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have several questions for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
much as I will miss Senator Graham , I welcome you , sir , and wish you good luck . 
it is now 1,196 days since Senator Graham promised me that " very , very soon " , " imminently " , " within the next few days " , we would have an announcement about ship - borne helicopter replacement . 
yesterday , the Minister of Foreign Affairs described calls for increased defence spending as " tiresome " . 
a very sick sailor , honourable senators , could not be evacuated from his ship off the East Coast of Nova Scotia because the HMCS Fredericton ' s Sea King was non - operational ; nor was the Sea King aboard HMCS Ville de Quebec operable ; nor was there any Sea King available at Shearwater . 
does the minister agree with the Minister of Foreign Affairs that defence spending is tiresome ? 
is he concerned with the welfare of our military personnel who are stuck with depending on unreliable and unsafe equipment ? 
indeed , it is almost immoral to allow those planes to fly . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Forrestall raises the issue of a particular sailor who found himself in difficult circumstances . 
my information is that the sailor is now making a successful recovery in hospital . 
however , that does not address the issue raised by the honourable senator . 
i have had some discussions with the Minister of National Defence , who has indicated to me that the replacement of the helicopters is an absolute top priority . 
i certainly share that view with the Minister of National Defence , and I will be working as diligently as possible to ensure that the appropriate mechanisms are in place for us to get on with the job of replacing those helicopters . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I gather we now have an undertaking from the Leader of the Government in the Senate to spend as much time in worrying about some of the problems that confront , in particular , the navy , as he will in trying to revive the Liberals ' fortunes in our great province . 
west Nova Scotia Regiment - Appointment of Honorary Colonel 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask a question concerning a matter that is now almost three years old . 
for well over two years the West Nova Scotia Regiment has been waiting to hear about the appointment of a new honorary colonel . 
it is getting to be a long time for that very colourful regiment to be without an honorary colonel . 
if the minister has no information today , and that may well be the case , could he have his staff take a look at whether this appointment could be made sooner rather than later ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I take seriously the admonition of the honourable senator in terms of improving the lot of the navy on the Atlantic coast . 
with respect to improving the fortunes of the Liberal Party , however , I suggest to him that the two may not be mutually exclusive . 
with respect to the particular regiment about which the honourable senator asks , I do not have any specific knowledge . 
i shall take his question as notice and return with the relevant information . 
in the meantime , if the honourable senator has any suggestions about a new honorary colonel , I would be more than happy to convey them to those concerned . 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Visit to Ottawa by Delegation - Discrepancy in Statistics 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , the Premiers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan came to Ottawa asking for help for farmers . 
the Prime Minister and the government indicated that there are statistics that show that the situation is not really that bad and that the government does not need to give additional help to farmers . 
however , that statistical information was not conveyed to those who came asking for help . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate use his good offices to ensure that the Minister of Agriculture will release those statistics so that we can examine them ? 
my reading of the statistics concerning Saskatchewan , and I am sure other people will have more to say on this , was unequivocal . 
as everyone knows , the costs of production are twice the selling price . 
can the minister tell us whether we will see those phantom figures about which the Prime Minister is talking ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture met with the Premiers of Saskatchewan and Manitoba and the delegation that accompanied them . 
there seemed to be some confusion , however , about the figures used by both parties . 
an effort is being made to rationalize them , and I can only presume that the once rationalized the figures will be released publicly sooner rather than later . 
however , I would not necessarily conclude from the fact that there was a difference of opinion with respect to some of the numbers involved that the government will not consider any further action . 
that would be a premature conclusion . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , the premier of my province came home bitterly disappointed . 
i know that a committee is looking at the figures . 
however , the amount asked for by Manitoba and Saskatchewan , as the minister is well aware , was $ 1.3 billion . 
i have gathered from conversations with those who came to see the Prime Minister , as well as from news reports and leaked documents that have appeared in the National Post , which as we know is never wrong , that there does not seem to be an indication from the government that anything like what is needed to solve this emergency crisis is being considered . 
in fact , the answer is unequivocally no . 
does the minister have anything to tell us today that suggests that that is not the attitude of the government ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the government placed some $ 900 million into the AIDA program . 
the provinces provided $ 600 million . 
in addition to this amount , the delegation ' s request was for another $ 1.3 billion . 
i think everyone agrees on the amount requested . 
the answer given was that the government felt that that $ 1.3 billion of assistance would not be forthcoming . 
i do not think that view has changed . 
however , it would be premature to conclude from that that there was no assistance available . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Representations to Prime Minister 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I am quite familiar with what the minister is saying . 
i have met personally , as have others , with several delegations . 
thus , I am not giving you my interpretation of events . 
they have asked for that . 
thus far , we have not had an indication that that will happen . 
will the minister convey to the Prime Minister and cabinet what the morale is like in Manitoba ? 
the people of my province believe that they are considered marginal and not worthy of the same attention received by every other region of the country . 
i do not want to share that view . 
will the minister also convey that feeling , which is beginning to settle in ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give the honourable senator my personal undertaking that her representations will be conveyed to the Prime Minister at the first opportunity . 
while the AIDA program represents a substantial amount of money , some $ 1.5 billion , and while there have been 36,000 applications under the program , there have been some complaints that the money has not flowed to meet the need in as efficient a fashion as it might . 
there are also concerns that the amount of money may not be sufficient . 
all of these representations are being taken very seriously . 
the government is giving them due consideration . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Efficacy of Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance Program 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate has indicated that the AIDA program is working well . 
the message from Western Canada is that it may be working well elsewhere but that it is does not suit Manitoba and Saskatchewan . That was conveyed personally by at least one premier to the Prime Minister . 
why does the government continue to say that the AIDA program works well ? 
why do Manitoba and Saskatchewan not receive any fair attention on a revamped AIDA program ? 
why were the premiers given hopes that there would be something forthcoming ? 
why would they be dragged to Ottawa only yet again to be told that the government would be investigating the matter ? 
after months of delay , is this a way of stalling until there will be no more family farms ? 
is this the hidden agenda of the government ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , to correct the honourable senator somewhat , I did not indicate that the AIDA program was working perfectly and needed no improvement . 
what I did say is that it is a substantial program of $ 1.5 billion . 
some 36,000 farmers have responded to it in the form of applications . 
at least at some point they believed it was worthwhile . 
i believe everyone has acknowledged that the money from the program has not flowed as efficiently as it might have . 
the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture take this matter seriously . 
their discussions with the premiers reinforced some of the impressions that they held . 
i am hopeful that some improvements can be made to existing programs and that , perhaps , other assistance might be considered . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I have been receiving calls from farmers who have filed applications under the AIDA program . 
they tell me that it takes up to six months to receive a response . 
how does the government know when it is working well when the answers to farmers who desperately need it are being delayed by six months ? 
some of those who filed in April and May are only now being told that they do not qualify . 
from where does the government ' s confidence in the AIDA program come ? 
after some consultation , the premiers came to Ottawa fully expecting that the Saskatchewan - Manitoba issue would be taken seriously and not be restudied . 
they expected that the farms that are going under would be saved . 
once they are gone , they will not come back . 
farmers are not a renewable resource . 
when they leave their family farms , they leave Saskatchewan . That destroys the base . 
we do not have the diversity that other provinces have , including the province of the Leader of the Government . 
we are dependent on agriculture , at least at this point in time . 
when will the AIDA program be looked at from the Saskatchewan - Manitoba perspective instead of from a global perspective ? 
there is no time to wait . 
no more study needs to be done . 
there is certainly a parallel to be made here with fishing , something which the minister should understand . 
the matter cannot wait . 
it is critical . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator will be pleased if I can assure her that such a review is now taking place . 
senator Andreychuk : 
we do not need a review . 
senator Boudreau : 
according to the honourable senator , and I think she is probably not alone in this opinion , the program has not worked as well as it might . 
the honourable senator talked about delays in dealing with applications . 
the government has taken that matter seriously . 
hopefully , the product of that serious review will be made public very soon . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Visit to Ottawa by Delegation - Discrepancy in Statistics 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , my question if for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
we have been talking about a great many things about which we do not know too much . 
however , one thing we do know is that farmers in Western Canada are among the most productive , efficient and innovative agricultural producers in the world . 
they produce commodities that are of the highest quality . 
yet , through no fault of their own , they are going broke . 
that is something we do know . 
they are facing bankruptcy and some are committing suicide . 
senators Sparrow , Gustafson , Spivak and Andreychuk have been talking about this problem since the fall of 1998 . We also talked about it in February of this year , as we did in March , April and June . 
the two premiers then came to pay the government a visit . 
what month is it now ? 
they received figures from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Agriculture . 
when they asked where the figures came from , they were told that they could not be told . 
i am a slow boy from the Prairies . 
i think we need to know from the minister when these figures will be released and how this could have happened in the first place . 
where did those numbers come from ? 
an apology should be made to the two premiers for doing this to them . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , obviously , there was a difference of opinion with respect to the figures being relied upon by both the premiers and the Prime Minister . 
i do not know that that has been resolved to date . 
every effort will be made to reconcile those figures and to indicate publicly how an agreement was reached . 
it is a very large problem , as the honourable senator knows . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , the premiers said that all their numbers came from Statistics Canada , the federal Department of Agriculture , and those figures that the federal government was releasing to the public . 
when asked to explain the numbers of the federal government to the premiers , they could not explain . 
it is not good enough to say that there was a difference of opinion . 
there was no difference of opinion . 
provincial premiers laid out a case . 
they used the statistics and the figures given to them by the Government of Canada . 
the Government of Canada then said , " We have these other numbers , but we are not going to tell you where they came from . " 
that was a big move for him . 
i think the Government of Canada should apologize to the premiers and with due haste give us a date when those numbers and their source will be laid before the House of Commons and the Senate . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will convey the senator ' s views to the Minister of Agriculture and to the Prime Minister . 
specifically , I believe that the Minister of Agriculture will bring the explanation forward . 
from discussions I have had with him , I anticipate that he will do so directly . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Economic Effects of Decline in Farm Income 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
agriculture and Agri - Food Canada ' s forecast for 1999 said that net farm income in Saskatchewan would be minus $ 48 million , the lowest it has been since 1933 , and that includes income from crop insurance , NISA and AIDA . 
the prediction for farm income in Manitoba was minus $ 100 million , the lowest in this century , even lower than in the 1930 s . 
the disappointment of the farmers and the premiers of the two provinces is enormous . 
i am a farmer and I live among them . 
there is no way out for us . 
something must be done . 
this will have very serious national implications for the whole of Canada . 
we are a very productive industry . 
there are no more efficient producers in the world than Western Canadian grain producers . 
do the Leader of the Government in the Senate , the cabinet , and the Prime Minister not realize that this will have serious national implications , not only in terms of separation or joining the U.S. , but in economic terms for Canada ? 
a great deal of our balance of trade comes from agricultural products produced by our farmers . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I can assure the honourable senator that the Prime Minister understands how important the agricultural sector is to the overall economy of our country . 
only a couple of weeks before I took up my appointment in this respected chamber I had the opportunity to travel with the Bank of Canada to Saskatchewan , to meet with farmers there , and to hear their representations . 
i paid an extended visit to a farming operation there and genuinely admire the operations , the efficiency , and the productivity of farmers on the Prairies . 
on that visit , however , I came to realize that this is a very large problem . 
it is a problem that involves more than just short - term government assistance . 
it also involves farmers being on a level playing field with their competitors around the world and our efforts to achieve that level playing field for them . 
they have shown in the past , as they will in the future , that with anything close to a level playing field they can succeed very well . 
i wish to indicate very clearly to the honourable senator , on behalf of the Prime Minister , the Minister of Agriculture , and myself , our appreciation of the significance of the agricultural sector in the West to the country as a whole . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possible Program for Farm Credit 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate consider presenting to cabinet some provision for relief of debt owed to the Farm Credit Corporation ? 
that is something the government can do , because the farmers will pay their bills if they have the money . 
as you know , there is a call for farmers not to pay their taxes . 
nine municipalities have voted not to pay their taxes . 
i talked to the reeve of the Municipality of Wellington . 
he said it is not that the farmers do not want to pay their taxes but that they cannot pay their taxes . 
they cannot pay with something they do not have . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate consider taking to the cabinet and the Prime Minister the suggestion that they look seriously at what can be done in the area of debt to the Farm Credit Corporation to alleviate the problem somewhat ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , without breaching cabinet confidentiality , I can indicate that this subject is on the cabinet agenda on an ongoing basis . 
that will come as no surprise to the honourable senator , who is very highly respected in the agricultural community and elsewhere . 
i will have no difficulty in taking those representations to my cabinet colleagues . 
library of Parliament Official Languages Scrutiny of Regulations 
standing Joint Committees - Message from Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that the following message had been received from the House of Commons : 
ordered , - That the Standing Joint Committees be composed of the Members listed below : 
library OF PARLIAMENT 
members : 
Assad , Bailey , Catterall , Clouthier , Finlay , Grey ( Edmonton North ) , Harb , Karygiannis , Lavigne , Lill , Limoges , Mayfield , Mercier , Plamondon , Price , Redman . - ( 16 ) 
associate Members : 
Davies , Dumas , Tremblay ( Rimouski - Mitis ) . 
official LANGUAGES 
members : 
b é langer , Bellemare , Chamberlain , de Savoye , Folco , Godin ( Acadie - Bathurst ) , Hill ( Macleod ) , Kilger , Lavigne , Mark , McTeague , McWhinney , Meredith , Muise , Plamondon , Serr é . - ( 16 ) 
associate Members : 
Dumas , Mercier , Nystrom , Tremblay ( Rimouski - Mitis ) , Turp . 
scrutiny OF REGULATIONS 
members : 
Assad , Bonwick , Bryden , Casey , Comuzzi , De Villers , Epp , Grewal , Lebel , Murray , Nystrom , Pankiw , Pillitteri , Saada , Venne , Wappel , White ( North Vancouver ) . - 17 
associate Members : 
Bellehumeur , Dockrill , Guimond , Tremblay ( Rimouski - Mitis ) . 
that a message be sent to the Senate to acquaint their Honours of the names of the Members to serve on behalf of this House on the Standing Joint Committees . 
attest : 
business of the Senate 
speaker ' s Statement on the Effect of Granting Leave During Routine Proceedings and the Event of October 14 , 1999 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreed that I now proceed to make the statement I was requested to make by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton the last time we met regarding the Routine of Business ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
during the Routine of Business on October 14 , Senator Hays sought leave under Government Notices of Motions to move a motion relating to an extensive adjournment of the Senate . 
leave was granted , but as soon as the motion was under debate there was some confusion about the nature of the proceedings . 
in the end , the motion on the two - week adjournment was adopted and the Senate proceeded to " Other Business " . 
nonetheless , when Orders of the Day were called , Senator Lynch - Staunton asked the Chair for a statement of clarification regarding this event so as to avoid the possibility of any confusion in the future . 
i am most grateful to Senator Lynch - Staunton for raising this matter , which I think is an important one . 
following this request , I studied the matter closely and I am now prepared to make a statement explaining my understanding of the way the rules and practices of the Senate operate . 
in making this statement , I have attempted to summarize the possibilities with some thoroughness , but I am not certain that I have actually exhausted all possibilities . 
moreover , I believe that this exercise has revealed some discrepancies and anomalies in the current rules that should be assessed by the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
the Routine of Business in its current form has been a feature of Senate practice since 1991 . 
in that year , amendments were made to the Rules of the Senate setting out the order in which different items of routine business would be called after Senators ' Statements . 
the sequence of Routine of Business is stated in rule 23 ( 6 ) . 
other subsections of rule 23 stipulate that no point of order or question of privilege can be raised during Routine of Business and that any requested standing vote be deferred to 5:30 p.m. unless it is in relation to a non - debatable motion moved without notice . 
other provisions of rule 23 seek to fix the time when Question Period will take place and when Orders of the Day shall be called if the time for Routine of Business is extended . 
the items of the Routine of Business include the presentation of reports from standing or special committees , government notices of motion , as well as notices for motions proposed by other senators . 
normally , chairmen simply present their reports and senators just give notice of their motions . 
on occasion , however , leave will be sought to consider a committee report either immediately or later the same day . 
similarly , under Notices of Motion , a committee chairman will seek leave to move a motion allowing a committee to meet at a time when the Senate might still be sitting . 
and , in recent years , every Tuesday the Senate is sitting , the Deputy Leader of the Government almost invariably seeks leave to move a motion to have the Senate meet at 1:30 p.m. on Wednesday rather than at 2:00 p.m. 
every time leave is sought during Routine of Business , it is a request to suspend the notice normally applicable under rules 57 or 58 . 
leave is granted once it is determined that no senator present in the chamber disagrees with the request . 
if only one senator refuses leave , the affected item cannot be considered before the required notice period has lapsed . 
furthermore , when leave is granted , the adoption of the report or motion is moved immediately , unless the leave request proposes to postpone consideration of the report or motion to later in the day . 
when the question on the report or motion is placed before the Senate , it is subject to debate . 
the fact that notice is required for these items makes it clear that they are debatable . 
no committee report or substantive motion presented to the Senate for adoption is exempt from the possibility of debate . 
that there is often little or no debate on motions moved with leave during the Routine of Business does not mean that they cannot be debated . 
only motions that can be moved without notice are non - debatable . 
once debate has begun , all the rules relating to debate are applicable , including the possibility of raising a point of order . 
this is because in agreeing to grant leave and put the question , the Senate has , in effect , stepped out of Routine of Business for the duration of the debate until it is decided or adjourned . 
in my view , the restriction imposed by rule 23 ( 1 ) preventing points of order or questions of privilege being raised during Routine of Business does not apply during the debate because the Senate is no longer in Routine of Business . 
if , in addition , a standing vote is requested at the conclusion of any debate , rule 23 ( 3 ) states that the vote will be deferred to 5:30 p.m. the same day unless , of course , there is leave to hold it at another time . 
another subsection of rule 23 remains pertinent even when there is a debate . 
rule 23 ( 7 ) provides that not later than 30 minutes after the first item of Routine of Business is called , the Senate will proceed to Question Period . 
it is possible , therefore , that proceedings on Routine of Business or a debate on an item during Routine of Business will be interrupted for the purposes of Question Period . 
in fact , this did happen on May 6 , 1993 , when debate on third reading of Bill C - 114 , amending the Canada Elections Act , was moved immediately following the presentation of the report on the bill by the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee without amendment . 
on that occasion , the bill received third reading before the 30 - minute time limit for Routine of Business was reached to begin Question Period . 
therefore , the Senate proceeded to Orders of the Day without reverting to Routine of Business . 
this then is a summary of what can occur whenever leave is granted during Routine of Business . 
i hope that it is of some assistance to understanding this aspect of our procedures . 
what occurred on Thursday October 14 when Senator Hays asked for leave to move his motion for the extended adjournment of the Senate was consistent with our rules . 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
1 st day of resuming debate ) 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to begin today by thanking my predecessor , my friend and fellow Nova Scotian , Senator Graham , for his excellent leadership in this chamber over the past two years . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Boudreau : 
i am grateful for the generous help and support he has extended to me over the past several weeks since my appointment , in the course of a very steep learning curve . 
i intend to shamelessly abuse his generous offer of continuing assistance . 
honourable senators , I also wish to take this opportunity to thank Senator Carstairs for her excellent work over the past two years as deputy leader . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Boudreau : 
i look forward , as well , to taking advantage of her extensive knowledge and experience as we embark on this new session of Parliament . 
senator Hays has been very candid in his remarks to me about his challenge in meeting the high standards set by Senator Carstairs . 
we will both rely on her very much in the days ahead . 
i should like to congratulate Senator Kroft and Senator Furey on their excellent speeches in moving and seconding the Address in reply to the Speech from the Throne . 
i would be remiss if I did not add my congratulations to those of many others to our newest Governor General . 
her appointment demonstrates that the Canadian dream is not just a dream ; it is a reality . 
you can rise to the highest positions in the land and contribute in a very meaningful way to our collective vision of Canada . 
what is that vision ? 
the Prime Minister expressed it in his reply to the Speech from the Throne . 
it is a Canada where every child gets the right start in life , where young people have a chance to grow and be the best at whatever they want to do , where citizens have access to the skills and knowledge they need to excel . 
it is a Canada where citizens , regardless of income , receive quality health services , where families enjoy safe communities and a clean environment and where we work together with other countries to promote peace , cultural diversity and the human purpose and benefits of the new global economy .... 
it is a Canada that is a leader and an example to the world . 
Skeptics may say that these are fine words , but what do they really mean ? 
fortunately , they mean a great deal . 
this vision is being realized through this government ' s strategy , set out in the Speech from the Throne , to work with provincial and territorial governments to develop the National Children ' s Agenda . 
it is being realized through the establishment of a national action plan on skills and learning for the 21 st century . 
it is being realized through initiatives to provide better access to world markets for Canadian companies . 
the vision is being realized through programs to improve Canada ' s knowledge infrastructure , including the creation of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research , and through stronger support for advanced research . 
it is being realized through actions to make our information infrastructure second to none . 
the vision is being realized by initiatives to improve our environment . 
honourable senators , this vision of Canada is an exciting one , and it can become a reality . 
our nation has turned a corner . 
our finances are in order , our budget is balanced and will continue to be balanced . 
as the Governor General told us in the Speech from the Throne : 
the Government is committed to prudent fiscal management . 
it will never let the nation ' s finances get out of control again . 
it will keep the ratio of debt to GDP on a permanent downward track . 
it will deliver on the commitment it made at the beginning of this Parliament to devote half the budget surplus to debt repayment and tax relief , and the other half to investments that address the social and economic needs of Canadians . 
however , honourable senators , there are other realities in our nation that demand our attention . 
i come from a region which has , for many years , felt its distance from the centre of this country ' s political and economic power . 
Cape Breton , for example , is a region that must completely transform its economy . 
because of the chance of geology , its economy for generations rested on the extraction of mineral deposits that are no longer economically extractable on a large scale , at least in the measure to which they have been in the past and on a steel industry which now seems to have lost its economic raison d 'ê tre . 
because of the chance of geography , Cape Breton never developed a critical mass of manufacturing industries or sophisticated service industries to round out the dependence on these traditional mineral - based industries . 
most communities have had several decades to adjust to the new , emerging economic realities , but time is a luxury that Cape Breton does not have . 
it must transform itself radically . 
it must leap decades of economic development . 
it must somehow propel itself into this new , post - industrial age almost overnight . 
i believe the Speech from the Throne carries a strong message of hope for Cape Breton and for the other regions across this great country that are very similar . 
in his speech , Senator Furey spoke of the adjustment now in progress in his province of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
he said : 
today , Newfoundland and Labrador finds itself caught up in the sweeping economic and technological changes that are making their way throughout the world . 
far from being swamped by these forces , however , the people of Newfoundland and Labrador are drawing on some long - standing skills and assets to deal with these fast - changing realities . 
creativity , resilience , community solidarity , determination and hard work are enabling many to realize their dreams and to move their province and their country forward . 
computers and the Internet can truly level the playing field between urban and rural communities , Central and Atlantic Canadians , the rich and the poor . 
i recently learned of someone who lives in Mount Pearl , Newfoundland , and who " tele - works " for a Los Angeles animation company . 
where he lives is not important to his employer . 
all that matters is his talent - and his Internet connections . 
the people of my province , Nova Scotia , know this very well . 
in every corner of the province , there are dozens of information technology businesses ready to leap on the information superhighway . 
Nova Scotians are already on that highway , some speeding to success . 
the Prime Minister has set a goal : to make Canada a world leader in the smart use of electronic ways of doing business and to encourage the rapid use of e - commerce throughout the economy . 
honourable senators , Nova Scotians lead Canada in buying and selling products over the Internet . 
we saw the opportunity and we seized it early on . 
let me give you an example . 
in 1995 , when the real estate market was taking a beating , the management of two twin office towers in downtown Halifax had a serious problem . 
the towers , which accounted for one - sixth of the office space in downtown Halifax , were severely underoccupied . 
then management took a big risk . 
they wired the towers for high - speed , cutting - edge access to the Internet . 
in November 1998 , these towers - Purdy ' s Wharf - made history when they became the first building complex in Canada to be its own Internet service provider . 
this foresight , imagination and investment has paid off . 
Purdy ' s Wharf has grown from eight information technology firms occupying 35,000 square feet in 1995 to some 40 such firms occupying 120,000 square feet . 
the tenants include AT & T Canada , Clear Picture Corporation , Fonorola , Fundy Communications , IBM Canada , iStar Internet , Knowledge Navigators International , Nova Knowledge , Sprint Canada , and Xerox Canada , to name just a few . 
linked by a fibre optic cable network , a powerful data circuit is made available to any tenant , providing 24 - hour access to the Internet at roughly 100 times the speed of a conventional modem . 
the development also established an intranet to allow networking among the tenants . 
in other words , the landlord took a bad real estate market and turned it into an opportunity , one that itself has created a hub of exciting high technology in the heart of Halifax . 
initiatives such as these , both public and private , are working . 
the September unemployment rate in Halifax was 6.2 per cent , the lowest it has been since World War II. 
this was the same rate as in Toronto and lower than the national average of 7.5 per cent for that month . 
we have the talent , honourable senators , and this government is working to make sure that all Canadians , wherever they live in Canada , have the tools they need to seize their potential . 
the Prime Minister was very clear in his speech in reply to the Speech from the Throne : 
getting Canadians connected , to each other , to schools and libraries , to our diverse stories and voices , to government , to the marketplace and to the world , is one of the key elements in establishing Canada as a world - leading economy and as a country of opportunity . 
we must aim to be the most connected country in the world . 
again , this government has set very concrete goals to achieve this : 
to ensure they have the skills required to use new information technology , we will recruit up to 10,000 young Canadians to train community members of all ages . 
honourable senators , skills and training are essential elements if we are to benefit from these new opportunities . 
the government announced that it will establish partnerships with other governments , public and private sector organizations , and individuals to establish a national action plan on skills and learning for the 21 st century . 
our knowledge - based economy is more than high - tech companies . 
it is an economy in which all sectors strive to use leading technologies and processes . 
it is an economy in which clusters of technology development already exist in smaller communities all over Canada . 
indeed , it is an economy in which technology can lead to greater economic stability for the primarily rural regions in which cyclical resource industries - agriculture , fisheries , forestry , mining and tourism - are now the dominant sources of wealth . 
the government will encourage the development and adoption of new technologies in all sectors . 
let us come back to my own province . 
how will Nova Scotia benefit ? 
again , very concretely , honourable senators . 
the energy sector holds tremendous promise for Atlantic Canada . 
i am personally very hopeful that it will open up new , challenging areas of research and development for the region that could lead , in turn , to exciting possibilities and applications outside of Atlantic Canada . 
the new Centre of Excellence in Petroleum Development and Petroleum Education , established at the University College of Cape Breton , could serve as a springboard for this research and development . 
i recently had the opportunity to announce the establishment of the Atlantic Canada Petroleum Institute at Dalhousie University in Halifax . 
these institutions are already working together and , indeed , forging alliances with leading petroleum engineering institutions elsewhere in the world . 
farms today often look like sophisticated intense manufacturing operations with large - scale manipulated growth and non - seasonal harvesting . 
traditional resource industries , like forestry and mining , are being impacted by biotechnology research . 
it is commonplace to sit at a desk overlooking the shore in Lunenburg County and , with the click of a mouse , exchange information and ideas with people halfway across the world . 
honourable senators , it is not enough to teach our young people how to use a computer or how to program software . 
we must open their eyes and their minds to the potential of the world around us . 
this government recognizes that fact . 
in the Speech from the Throne , the government announced that it will enable young Canadians to apply their energy and talent overseas by participating in international apprenticeship programs and helping developing countries get connected to the Internet . 
these experiences can be invaluable , such as the first - hand concrete training they provide ; the insights into other countries and other peoples ; the awareness that the world is a big place but that distance is not a barrier to working together . 
these are important lessons that will position our young people - our future leaders - to carry our communities and our country into the 21 st century . 
these are initiatives that can help small communities , as well as large urban centres . 
i have great confidence in the people of Canada , and they have a growing confidence in themselves . 
whether they live in the midst of our great urban centres , or on a rocky outport in Atlantic Canada , or in the forested interior of British Columbia , the message of the Speech from the Throne is that distance today matters less than ever before in our history . 
this government will work to ensure that Canadians , wherever they live , have access to the tools they need to make it in this new , post - industrial age . 
will it be easy ? 
it is never easy . 
building this country certainly was not easy . 
our forefathers and mothers founded this country against the odds of a very harsh climate , impossibly vast distances , and profound linguistic , cultural and religious differences . 
what were the odds ? 
they did not allow themselves to be defeated by these difficulties . 
we owe it to these pioneers , who dreamed this country and then made it happen , to now ourselves dream a dream for the next century . 
the new pioneers are alive and well in Atlantic Canada , as they are in all parts of our country . 
these new pioneers who dream the dream of the 21 st century will have no patience with the naysayers and the doomsday prophets . 
honourable senators , our Governor General gave an inspiring speech in this very chamber when she assumed her new position . 
she said : 
we must not see ourselves as people who simply react to trends but as people who can initiate them . 
we must not see ourselves as people to whom things are done but as people who do things . 
this government has declared its intention to see this country proud and prosperous , leading the world into the next millennium and beyond . 
all of us , as parliamentarians , should be honoured to be in a position to help make this come true . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to congratulate the Governor General on her appointment and wish her well in her new role as representative of Canada ' s head of state . 
madam Clarkson succeeds one of our former colleagues who brought special personal characteristics to a demanding and not always understood role . 
may Rom é o LeBlanc , and his charming wife , Diana , have many happy years of a well - earned retirement on the shores of the Northumberland Strait . 
politics can be as cruel as it can be exhilarating , and not just following an election result . 
relationships between its participants , too many times strained by personal ambition , frequently test one ' s mettle , sometimes to the breaking point . 
the success of a political party is intrinsically linked to its supporters loyalty to it , not the least to its leader , no matter personal disappointment or setback . 
honourable senators , these reflections come to mind in the light of Senator Graham ' s sudden removal from the responsibilities of Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
during his term , Senator Graham ' s commitment to the Senate and to Nova Scotia was a total commitment to meet government and party objectives . 
his stature as a man of honour and principle was never more challenged than it was last month , and his conduct since reaffirms it as nothing else could . 
let me borrow and paraphrase from Edmund Burke to summarize my reaction to Senator Graham being so cavalierly moved to the sidelines : 
magnanimity in politics is often the truest wisdom , and a great political party and little minds do not go well together . 
this being said , on behalf of my caucus colleagues and myself , I wish Senator Boudreau well as Leader of the Government . 
his admission , however , that he is here primarily to promote his party ' s fortunes in Nova Scotia - at which I think he did extraordinarily well in his remarks a moment ago - is disturbing , as it raises questions as to the use of the appointed chamber to seek elective office . 
senator Boudreau has stated quite clearly that he intends to be a candidate for a seat in the House of Commons come the next election . 
this , to me , is like a player in the National Hockey League anxious to be sent down to the minors . 
hopefully , Senator Boudreau will soon come to appreciate the performance and significance of the Senate and to the realization that it is in this chamber where legislation is most properly scrutinized , where partisanship is never shrill , and where government supporters , ministers and backbenchers alike are treated as individuals , not as rubber stamps , and act accordingly , free from the constraints imposed on our caucus colleagues in the other place . 
as mover and seconder for an Address in reply to the Speech from the Throne , Senators Kroft and Furey acquitted themselves with great distinction and eloquent feeling . 
one must not look to their remarks , however , to get anything but a vague reference to the speech itself which so unfairly burdened Her Excellency , in sharp contrast to the one she gave following her swearing in . 
senator Kroft dismissed it in a few short paragraphs and gave us an appreciation of his strong commitment to his country and to the government , as did as well Senator Furey . 
indeed , they had little choice , as a speech so anticipated has immediately become a non - event . 
what should have been a vision of the next century turned out to be paragraphs of platitudes . 
the anticipation was based on a widespread expectation of concrete proposals to resolve serious current problems . 
instead , to everyone ' s amazement , there was not a word on western agriculture which is going through its worst crisis since the 1930 s , on fisheries which have suffered serious complications , on illegal immigration which underlines serious flaws in Canadian legislation , on passenger airline difficulties which even today the government leaves to something called " the market " to resolve , and on tax relief which , if one deciphers the few words devoted to it , will be addressed just prior to the next election . 
poverty and the plight of the homeless were given little attention . 
nonetheless , there are two subject - matters in the speech on which I wish to comment . 
the first is in the statement that the government " will never let the nation ' s finances get out of control again . " 
it is reassuring to see that those who were there at the time and deliberately let the nation ' s finances get out of control have finally seen the light , however reluctantly . 
i think in particular of the Prime Minister who , as President of the Treasury Board and Minister of Finance in the 1970 s , was a significant contributor to a near six - fold increase in the budgetary deficit and a more than doubling of the net public debt . 
what is not acknowledged by this government but is more and more being recognized and appreciated elsewhere is that the fiscal and monetary successes of the moment result from the fact that they are a continuation of the policies adopted by the Mulroney governments and constantly opposed by Liberals at the time - reduction of program spending in line with real national needs , creation of an operating surplus , reduction of interest rates , and a reduction in the inflation rate . 
these results , which would never have been achieved under the Liberals of old - plus free trade , also violently objected to by the same free spenders - are now the mainstays of the current government ' s policies , a government which shamelessly ignores the extraordinary efforts made by the Mulroney governments , embarrassed as they should be by their vigorous opposition to them as they were being introduced , not the least , of course , being the Goods and Services Tax . 
in September 1990 , the Liberal leader stated : 
.... the position of the party and the caucus is clear : 
we are opposed to the GST and we do not want to see it implemented . 
recently , the Prime Minister lauded the tax and dismissed any attempt to remove it , even on reading material , as evidenced by a vote here in September . 
the second point in the speech that attracts my attention is the most worrisome , because it impacts upon the future of this country : 
the Government of Canada therefore reaffirms the commitment it has made to Quebecers and all other Canadians that the principle of clarity as set out by the Supreme Court of Canada , will be respected . 
this , added to certain less ambiguous comments by certain government spokespersons , suggests that , if there were a referendum , the Liberal government intends to use its own interpretation of the Supreme Court of Canada ' s opinion on the matter of a vote in favour of sovereignty ! 
i say opinion rather than decision , because that is what the Supreme Court has in fact brought down . 
there is nothing in the opinion that is binding on anyone whatsoever . 
i believe the Court went too far , going beyond the three issues on which it was asked to decide , and in so doing participating in a political debate that is not within its mandate . 
why ? 
as well as believing that the Supreme Court has gone too far in its statements , I am equally dismayed that the federal government is stating its preparedness to take part in a referendum , not only before one is held , but even before it is announced . 
the top priority for any national government must be the unity of the country , and it ought never to take any action that would be contrary to that unity . 
by interpreting a series of vague conditions from the Supreme Court as its sees fit , the government is in fact liable to find itself ending up a partner in an adventure that could cost all Canadians dearly . 
i wish to end with a major concern which preoccupies many , and that is the growing irrelevancy of Parliament , especially that of the House of Commons . 
i have never hidden my admiration for the United States form of government because it is based on a system of checks and balances that limits the excesses in which one branch can successfully engage by itself . 
the President and the Congress are more often than not constantly in search of compromise , as both are major participants in the development and final adoption of legislation . 
executive indiscretions and cover - ups seldom remain hidden for long , as a slightest whiff of them arouses Congress to investigate them . 
of course , many times the legislative branch will take exaggerated advantage of its jurisdiction to hold up indefinitely a presidential appointment or some other executive initiative , but this does not take away from the fact that both branches are more or less on the same footing and can seldom succeed independently of each other . 
the House was in session only a few days this month when the government imposed closure on Bill C - 6 . 
closure was threatened on legislation regarding the Nisga ' a Final Agreement . 
why ? 
simply because these bills , we are told , had been debated enough elsewhere , and further discussion in the House of Commons would bring nothing new to the debate . 
can disdain for parliamentary democracy be expressed more clearly ? 
unfortunately , the Senate was treated more or less the same way in September when it was recalled to debate Bill C - 32 , the environment bill , and Bill C - 78 , the pension bill . 
the new Minister of the Environment , no sooner in office , announced that Bill C - 32 had been debated long enough and that no amendments would be accepted . 
closure was imposed by the majority on the committee , which then unanimously reported to the Senate that there were so many deficiencies in the bill that a review of it should begin immediately after passage . 
closure was imposed at third reading , the government side arguing that while there were many flaws in the bill , it was still better than the act it was called to replace . 
what the Senate majority did in passing Bill C - 32 is knowingly support a bill which it knew was deserving more study in line with the traditional role the Senate . 
it was not one of its finer moments . 
the pension bill was delayed from June until September in order to allow Treasury Board and the Public Service Alliance an opportunity to meet over the summer months to try to iron out certain misunderstandings , especially with regard to the surplus . 
treasury Board refused to meet with the union if the surplus was on the agenda , maintaining that it belonged in total to the government . 
the new President of the Treasury Board showed the same inflexibility . 
thus , the unanimous will of the Senate was completely disregarded . 
during third reading debate , we were advised that if the union wanted to advance its claim to part ownership of that surplus , all it had to do was take up a court action . 
once again , the Senate abdicated its traditional role of serious examination of legislation in favour of bowing to an instruction from elsewhere to be done with the bill , whatever its weaknesses . 
i spoke earlier of the new Leader of the Government in the Senate being impressed with the work being done here compared with that in the other place . 
i trust that what happened in September was prompted more by pre - prorogation impatience than by the beginning of an effort to diminish the Senate ' s contributions to the parliamentary process and that this session will see us back in our traditional role , always mindful , of course , of the will of the elected house . 
i also trust that constant rumours of stripping the opposition of all but one committee chairmanship are also ill - founded . 
any detached observer can but agree that committee chairmanships held by my caucus colleagues during Parliament ' s first session were exercised with distinction and as a credit to the Senate . 
any attempt to reduce the contribution of non - government supporters to the committee system without just cause will be strongly resisted , not out of petty egoism , but because the great value of this place rests on a foundation of working together and not against each other . 
when we had a majority in opposition , we resisted many times - with difficulty , I admit - the urge to obstruct for the sake of obstruction , which was the case during much of the 1980 s and in 1990 when the roles were reversed . 
we deliberately worked toward the defeat of only two bills , those dealing with the Pearson airport and redistribution , as they were clearly unconstitutional . 
at all times , we are conscious that the will of elected representatives must be respected , as long as it is expressed within constitutional bounds . 
honourable senators , the Senate ' s success is measured not by the massive use of numbers to ram bills through but by the contribution of all members toward the improvement of legislation sent here from the other place . 
to deny the opposition anything but an insignificant role in this process will be to turn the whole place into a mirror image of the House of Commons and give even more ammunition to those who seek its abolition . 
such an approach could easily alter the current spirit of cooperation and harmony which , ironically enough , is not foreign to the opposition ' s respect for the Senate , a respect the majority , I trust , will continue to share . 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , the purpose of Bill S - 2 is to facilitate the making of medical decisions by patients through the protection of health care providers from criminal liability when they act in accordance with their patients ' wishes . 
more specifically , the bill would clarify the law by protecting health care providers when they , first , withhold or withdraw life - sustaining treatment at the request of the patient ; or , second , administer pain - relieving medication to alleviate massive physical pain . 
this bill also provides for the Minister of Health to establish national guidelines and to promote education and training in the areas of the withholding or withdrawal of life - sustaining medical treatment , the controlling of pain , and palliative care . 
bill S - 2 , the short title of which is the Medical Decisions Facilitation Act , is the third bill of its kind to be introduced to this chamber in recent years . 
honourable senators , on November 27 , 1996 , I introduced Bill S - 13 , to amend the Criminal Code ( protection of health care providers ) . 
that bill died on the Order Paper with the federal election call in May 1997 . 
in the last session of this Parliament , Senator Th é r è se Lavoie - Roux introduced Bill S - 29 , which had the same general purpose as Bill S - 13 , the protection of patients and health care providers . 
bill S - 29 died on the Order Paper with the prorogation of Parliament in September of this year . 
in my view , Bill S - 2 , the proposed Medical Decisions Facilitation Act , incorporates the best of both Bills S - 13 and S - 29 . 
however , let me make it perfectly clear to all honourable senators that I do not consider this my bill . 
i consider this bill to be the bill of the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide . 
it is the work of the former Senator Joan Neiman , Senators Lavoie - Roux , Corbin , Beaudoin , DeWare , Keon and , yes , of me , since I , too , sat on the committee . 
if I were to dedicate this bill to anyone , however , it would be to the late Senator No ë l Desmarais who , while not a full - time member of the committee , replaced Senator DeWare for several months while she was caring for her sick husband , and who continued to dialogue with us until confronted with his own terminal illness . 
honourable senators will note that Bill S - 2 begins with a preamble . 
on February 23 , 1994 , the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide was appointed " to examine and report upon the legal , social and ethical issues relating to euthanasia and assisted suicide . " 
they have to do with palliative care and with the withholding and withdrawing of life support treatment . 
they have to do with the controlling of pain . 
on June 6 , 1995 , the committee submitted to the Senate its report entitled , " Of Life and Death . " 
in my view , the preamble to this bill is essential in order to give the credit to the Senate that it so richly deserves . 
i know that some legal draftspersons do not like preambles . 
however , in this case it is not only positive , but , in my view , just to the work of this extremely hard - working committee . 
let me turn now to the specifics of Bill S - 2 . 
clause 2 of the bill provides that no health care provider is guilty of an offence under the Criminal Code by reason only that the health care provider administers medication with the intention of alleviating or removing the physical pain of a person in dosages that might shorten the life of that person . 
in " Of Life and Death " the special Senate committee recognized that the practice of providing treatment to alleviate physical pain , even though it may shorten life , is currently legal . 
the Criminal Code does not prohibit palliative care even if it hastens the death of a patient , so long as the care is carried out in accordance with generally accepted medical practices . 
however , a number of witnesses testified before the committee that doctors are often reluctant to provide sufficient pain control medication to alleviate suffering if there is a possibility that it may shorten the life of patients , for fear that the doctor might be held criminally liable . 
because of evidence from a wide variety of witnesses who testified as to the confusion that exists among health care providers and the general public regarding the legal status of the practice , the special Senate committee unanimously recommended that the criminal law be clarified . 
there are many palliative care physicians who would argue that the provision of pain relief never shortens life . 
we heard testimony that patients whose medication is titrated appropriately simply adjust to the increasing amount of medication given . 
however , we simply do not know , and in my view it is really not the issue . 
the concern that each and every one of us must have is that patients in Canada are entitled to be as pain free as possible . 
the Senate committee was not alone in recommending clarification of the criminal law regarding the permissibility of providing , in order to alleviate suffering , treatment that may shorten life . 
it was recommended by the Law Reform Commission in its report in 1983 . 
moreover , the Canadian Medical Association has advocated clarification of the law in this area since 1992 . 
the special Senate committee used the broader terminology " alleviation of suffering " , but the wording of clause 2 narrows the scope and excludes situations where medication might be administered to alleviate emotional or psychological suffering . 
in my view , we must proceed slowly ; nothing in this bill should cause undue controversy , and yet the area of emotional and physiological suffering is fraught with controversy . 
clause 2 does not provide protection where another ground of criminal liability , such as criminal negligence , might exist . 
honourable senators , let me be absolutely clear that clause 2 specifically does not apply to situations where there is an intention to cause death . 
it applies only where the intent is to alleviate the physical pain of the patient . 
it is very important to stress that . 
no one should be removed from criminal liability if it is their intention to kill . 
clause 3 ( 1 ) of Bill S - 2 provides that no health care provider is guilty of an offence under the Criminal Code by reason only that they withhold or withdraw life - sustaining medical treatment from a competent person who requests that the treatment be withheld or withdrawn . 
clause 3 ( 2 ) clarifies the circumstances in which a request is valid under clause 3 ( 1 ) . 
an advance written directive made under the laws of a province will always take precedence . 
most provinces have already enacted some type of legislation regarding advance directives . 
the most recent province to have advance directive legislation is Alberta , where the Personal Directives Act was proclaimed and took effect on December 1 , 1997 . 
Manitoba , Newfoundland , Nova Scotia , Ontario , and Quebec have also legalized the making of what is called , in the vernacular , living wills . 
British Columbia and Prince Edward Island have passed such laws , but they are not yet in force . 
in the absence of an advance written directive under the laws of a province , an informal written directive , or a request made orally or by signs made at any time , is a valid request if it is made in the presence of at least one witness . 
subclause 3 ( 3 ) provides that a substitute request can come from a proxy , legal representative or spouse , only if the patient is incompetent and did not , while competent , make a valid request . 
in " Of Life and Death " the special Senate committee defined " the withholding of life - sustaining treatment " as " not starting treatment that has the potential to sustain life " ; for example , not initiating cardiopulmonary resuscitation , not giving a blood transfusion , or not starting artificial hydration or nutrition . 
it defined " the withdrawal of life - sustaining treatment " as " stopping treatment that has the potential to sustain life " ; for example , removing a respirator . 
the special Senate committee recognized that Canadian courts have held that there is a common law right of patients to refuse to consent to medical treatment or to demand that treatment , once commenced , be withdrawn . 
cases such as Malette v. Schulman in 1990 , Nancy B . v. H ô tel - Dieu de Quebec in 1992 , and the Rodriguez case in 1993 , specifically recognized this right , even though the consequence of withholding or withdrawing life - sustaining treatment is death . 
i think it is important to review some of these cases with you . 
in Malette v. Schulman in 1990 , the Ontario Court of Appeal held that instructions on blood transfusions issued when a patient was competent had to be followed even when she was incapable of making a decision . 
the court found that the physician must follow a Jehovah Witness ' written instruction refusing all blood transfusions , even in an emergency situation where the patient was unable to give consent . 
in the January 1992 decision in the case of Nancy B . , the Quebec superior court ruled that a competent adult patient suffering from an incurable disease , and bedridden for life , had the right to request that her doctor disconnect the respirator keeping her alive . 
in making his decision , Mr. Justice Dufour cited sections of the Quebec Civil Code which provide that the human person is inviolable and that no one can be made to undergo treatment without consent . 
the case also dealt with the issue of the criminal liability of the doctor who , at Nancy B . ' s request , would be required to remove her from the respirator . 
after referring to sections 216 , 217 , 45 and 219 of the Criminal Code , as well as the provisions dealing with homicide , the judge concluded that it was neither unreasonable nor wanton and reckless conduct for a physician , at the request of a patient , to disconnect the patient ' s respirator and allow the patient ' s disease to take its natural course . 
in 1993 , Mr. Justice Sopinka of the Supreme Court of Canada , writing for the majority in the Rodriguez case , also acknowledged the right of patients to refuse to consent to treatment or demand that treatment be withdrawn even where doing so would result in death . 
it is important to remember that the majority in this case did not favour euthanasia and assisted suicide . 
however , they did favour the right to withhold or withdraw treatment , which is the subject of this bill . 
however , honourable senators , witnesses before the special standing committee testified that in some cases patients ' wishes were not being honoured because the Criminal Code was unclear and health care providers feared that they would be held liable . 
because of this evidence as to the confusion that exists among health care providers and the general public , the special Senate committee again unanimously recommended that the existing common law be codified in order to clarify the circumstances wherein the withholding and withdrawal of life - sustaining treatment is legally acceptable . 
again , the Senate committee was not the first to recommend a clarification of the law in this area . 
in 1983 , the Law Reform Commission of Canada recommended that the Criminal Code be clarified in that respect as well . 
since 1992 , the Canadian Medical Association has advocated the clarification in the Criminal Code of the legality of the cessation of treatment in order to protect health care providers from liability . 
honourable senators , clause 6 of Bill S - 2 is the most clear example of the merging of Bill S - 13 , my original bill , and Senator Lavoie - Roux ' s bill , Bill S - 29 . 
bill S - 29 provided for the establishment of national guidelines for pain control and withholding and withdrawal of life - sustaining treatment . 
clause 6 of this bill provides for the Minister of Health to establish national guidelines , in consultation with provincial authorities and associations , for the withholding and withdrawal of life - sustaining medical treatment , for the controlling of pain , and for palliative care . 
the bill allows for the Minister of Health to promote and encourage public education and training of health care professionals in controlling pain and in palliative care . 
the bill further provides for the investigation , research and monitoring of the frequency and conditions of requests for the withholding and withdrawal of treatment . 
the Senate ' s special committee , in its report , " Of Life and Death , " recognized the importance of national guidelines in these areas . 
numerous witnesses before the committee recommended increased education and training for health care providers in palliative care and pain control . 
almost all the witnesses who appeared before the special Senate committee agreed that more research was necessary in these areas . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 2 is a direct result of the work of the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide . 
in my view , it comprises the best elements of the previous two bills that were introduced in this chamber . 
its purpose is to clarify the criminal law by codifying the existing common law and making it accessible and understandable for all Canadians , in order to protect patients and their health care providers . 
i look forward to the debate on this bill . 
more important , I look forward to the committee process , wherein I would envisage further study and debate . 
i particularly welcome the participation of Senator Lavoie - Roux , who , like me , wants to see the recommendations of the Senate special committee put into force and effect . 
perhaps this bill still does not have it right . 
we are not perfect as human beings , unfortunately . 
i would hope that the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee of the Senate will examine this bill fully and with care , in order to meet the needs of Canadians , and to make amendments to enhance the bill , if necessary . 
i want this bill to be the best it can be , and I know that that is the desire of Senator Lavoie - Roux and the other members of the special Senate committee . 
i hope that we can send this bill quickly to the committee so that the study , which , by its very nature , will be time - consuming , can begin as soon as possible , and before the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , known for the long hours and busy schedule that it keeps , is forced to deal with the heavy load of government legislation . 
honourable senators , I commend Bill S - 2 to your deliberations , and I urge you to support it . 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
would the honourable senator take a question ? 
senator Carstairs : 
certainly . 
senator Roche : 
thank you . 
i should first like to express my appreciation to Senator Carstairs for the sensitive manner in which she has presented her bill . 
i hope there will be a thorough debate on this extremely important subject and that the bill will not be rushed , so that there will be a full opportunity , in the Senate on second reading as well as at committee stage , for the examination that it deserves . 
in order to prepare myself for a contribution to this debate , I should like to direct two questions to Senator Carstairs , with her consent . 
first , Senator Carstairs made it very clear that the purpose of the bill is to alleviate pain and not to shorten life , but because some pain alleviation does have the effect of shortening life , is Senator Carstairs concerned that there could be here an opening of the door to assisted suicide ? 
she has made it very clear that extraordinary treatment to prolong life is , ethically , not required , but , in the treatment of terminally ill patients , is there not some apprehension that the various pressures that arise can lead to some form of encouragement and / or pressure to use pain - alleviation drugs and medicines for a secret purpose , or a purpose that is not put overtly , which is in effect to shorten life ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for his question , because that really is the nub of the whole issue here . 
that is why we have to have guidelines and a control system put into place . 
i would refer the honourable senator to the Catechism of the Catholic Church , particularly to paragraph 2279 , because I think they understand the difference quite clearly . 
the catechism says the following : 
even if death is thought imminent , the ordinary care owed to a sick person cannot be legitimately interrupted . 
the use of painkillers to alleviate the sufferings of the dying , even at the risk of shortening their days , can be morally in conformity with human dignity if death is not willed as either an end or a means ... 
to me , that kind of clarity is so necessary that , if the bill does not have it , we must make sure that it does . 
i think it already does , but if it does not , then let us amend it so that it is absolutely clear . 
senator Roche : 
i thank the honourable senator . 
that answer is certainly helpful to the core of the debate that is now being developed . 
my second question deals with the Criminal Code . 
i am not clear in my own mind as to why this bill seeks to codify existing common law or to allow certain actions that might , in effect , be criminal actions without addressing the Criminal Code itself through an amendment . 
why is this bill bypassing an amendment to the Criminal Code itself ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , again I thank the honourable senator for the question . 
interestingly enough , in the first bill I proposed , there was a direct amendment to the Criminal Code . 
however , it became clear , during the debate and discussion in the Senate chamber and also later through the presentation of Senator Lavoie - Roux ' s bill , that we were trying to do more than just amend the Criminal Code . 
we were also trying to establish national guidelines and put into place some controls and some educational experiences in the whole area of pain control and also in areas of research . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator Lavoie - Roux , debate adjourned . 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux rose pursuant to notice of October 14 , 1999 : 
honourable senators , it is difficult for most Canadians to make sense of the reasons for the persistent differences between the conditions and challenges faced by aboriginal peoples and people in the rest of Canada . 
it is also difficult for them to truly grasp the reasons why different solutions are needed , solutions that flow from aboriginal realities , rights , values and strengths . 
it may be difficult , but it is essential if we are to move forward in harmony . 
this shelter strategy is to determine whether recent federal decisions will lead to shelter improvements for aboriginal families and whether the present federal strategy can be significantly improved . 
this working paper is intended to facilitate a genuine dialogue about the principal features of a strategy that will take us into the next century and the best way to implement it . 
we have chosen to dwell on the strengths of all peoples in Canada and the sources of these strengths to arrive at a contemporary strategy . 
one source of strength sometimes forgotten or put aside is the will and the right of aboriginal peoples - the M é tis , the Inuit and the First Nations people - to seek and implement their own solutions . 
it is this strength that has spawned hundreds of successful grassroots initiatives . 
sometimes they have become bogged down in red tape or somehow derailed . 
other self - made initiatives have grown into regional and then national networks , and prominent institutions we now rely on . 
if we can better combine aboriginal and Canadian strengths and liberate these strengths to create shelter improvements , we will have done much more than anyone might suspect . 
i shall turn now to the subject of the scope and intent of a shelter strategy for aboriginal families . 
some may think we do not need another study of housing conditions or a study of ways to tinker with national programs in the hope that some benefits will reach aboriginal families . 
we agree . 
too many of these studies have already been done , with little improvement to living conditions . 
besides , we have all had the benefit of the advice and unparalleled research of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples of 1996 . 
now we have seen the early achievements of the " Gathering Strength " initiative , the federal government ' s action plan introduced in January of 1997 . 
we had hoped the other partners in Confederation would come forward and announce their plans and their priorities . 
what has come forward is a disappointment . 
some progress is evident , but even so , several senators and aboriginal leaders have become increasingly concerned about the lack of action towards improving shelter conditions for aboriginal families . 
our intent is to rekindle a national dialogue about making a clearer and stronger shelter strategy for aboriginal families . 
we wish to focus on the future direction of a strategy for families living outside reserve lands and lands set aside for aboriginal people under comprehensive land claim agreements . 
aboriginal families living on these lands have very different treaty and statutory arrangements for dealing with shelter matters than families living in other locations . 
nonetheless , any shelter strategy must respond to the population shifts from these lands . 
many M é tis , Inuit and First Nations people will leave their ancestral communities to seek jobs , promising opportunities and decent shelter in the cities and towns of Canada . 
it is a growing trend and it will continue . 
the higher than national average growth rates and youthfulness - 10 years younger than the general population - is well known . 
fifty years ago , less than 200,000 aboriginal people were counted . 
now more than 1 million live in Canada . 
this figure , however , does not include the M é tis population of this country . 
many others aboriginals live in the United States and may or may not return after their working years . 
future growth rates forecast the aboriginal population will rise another 400,000 over the next generation . 
their social and economic circumstances may show only modest improvement . 
a reasonable shelter strategy must be able to address the expected future circumstances of the aboriginal population and the emerging priorities . 
i shall turn now to the reasons for the differences in aboriginal shelter conditions and challenges . 
one principal reason over half of today ' s aboriginal families live in substandard shelter is a lingering and deep poverty . 
many are either one cheque away from living on the street or will add to already overcrowded conditions in rural , remote and urban communities . 
when aboriginal people do get jobs , they are often lower paying , and their paycheques must be stretched to accommodate the basic needs of food and clothing in larger - than - average size families . 
it is estimated that aboriginal employment income is two - thirds of the national average . 
over 40 per cent had no employment income in 1995 . 
credit is often poor or non - existent . 
what would happen if aboriginal peoples were to achieve employment and wage parity with the average Canadian ? 
obviously , a higher standard of living would be assured and all of Canada would benefit . 
in 1991 , former minister of Indian and northern affairs Thomas Siddon testified that if parity were achieved by the year 2000 , Canada ' s gross national product would improve the federal fiscal position by $ 4.3 billion and reduce the national debt by $ 20 billion . 
the royal commission ventured its own analysis on this point . 
the commission estimated that it costs Canada $ 7.5 billion per year so long as the economic and social circumstances of aboriginal peoples remain below the national average . 
importantly , this cost consists of a loss of net income of $ 2.9 billion to aboriginal peoples and a fiscal cost of $ 4.6 billion , including $ 2.1 billion in foregone government revenue . 
sadly , a shelter strategy will need to contend with deep aboriginal poverty because there is no evidence that the economic and social disparities between the general and the aboriginal populations will soon disappear . 
the recent rise of literacy rates and overall education levels will help some families , but good shelter will remain unaffordable for far too many others . 
the economic gaps have closed far too slowly over the past 20 years to suggest that aboriginal poverty has been dealt with . 
together they have caused great hardship . 
if we are to put a shelter strategy on a solid foundation , it is wise to consider some of these reasons . 
discrimination , in all its forms , is still a reason for poor aboriginal shelter . 
another reason is that aboriginal shelter issues received government attention much later than the needs of other parts of Canadian society . 
it was then called Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation . 
nearly 30 years later , the rural housing program for aboriginal peoples came into existence . 
the 1978 Urban Native Housing Program followed . 
new housing commitments to these programs were terminated at the same time the federal government stopped making social housing commitments on January 1 , 1994 . In the entire history of the urban native program , no program evaluation was ever conducted . 
a further reason for the disparities is the low priority accorded aboriginal shelter matters . 
one explanation for this may be the lack of aboriginal representation in the Parliament of Canada and participation in the federal public service . 
the halls of power and authority have few aboriginal voices to bring attention to the growing problems or their solutions . 
that made it much easier to ignore their conditions . 
just when more Canadians started to become aware of the needs of aboriginal peoples , national priorities changed . 
the unfortunate situation is that improved living conditions for Canadians overshadow the aboriginal reality . 
honourable senators , the notion that aboriginal problems and solutions are simply scaled - down versions of Canadian problems and solutions is still another reason for poor results and outcomes within aboriginal societies . 
there is no evidence to suggest such a strategy has been successful over the years . 
in fact , it is a discredited model , and major studies of social and economic conditions , including the December 1998 homelessness study , recommend distinct strategies to contend with the realities faced by aboriginal peoples . 
while there has been some aboriginal service delivery added to the administration of shelter programs , the basic policies and programs are the ones designed to address non - aboriginal problems , and management rests with the federal or provincial governments . 
jurisdictional wrangling over the responsibility for sheltering aboriginal peoples living outside aboriginal lands is a troublesome matter with no end in sight . 
most provinces , territories and aboriginal leadership put much of the responsibility on the federal government . 
yet transfers of cash , tax points , powers and administration steadily puts greater responsibility in the provincial sphere . 
it is a source of considerable controversy and has stymied the progress . 
these are a few reasons for the differences in shelter conditions and the differences in the challenges faced by aboriginal peoples . 
we raise these to help shape future shelter solutions . 
there is no intention to blame . 
the historical , legal and political reasons for poverty and powerlessness and the damage to aboriginal societies is another story - one told by the royal commission and in the testimony of many aboriginal leaders . 
even so , it cannot go unsaid that these overarching reasons bear heavily on the lower social and economic status of aboriginal peoples today . 
honourable senators , I should like to spend a moment or two talking about the impacts and outcomes of past federal strategies . 
federal strategies , at different times over the last 25 years , have relied on a non - specific mixture of subsidies for renovation , emergency repairs , a remote housing program , a specific urban program , a rural program with a 50 per cent target of aboriginal occupancy , tax credits , shelter allowances , and self - help projects , including home ownership , that were short - lived . 
provincial and local governments cost - shared a small part of these programs but not all of them . 
for example , the Urban Native Housing Program was financed from aboriginal rents and federal subsidies only . 
tripartite committees were formed with aboriginal service providers in some instances . 
a recent estimate of CMHC expenditures for aboriginal peoples not living within reserves pegged the annual outlay at $ 172.5 million to address shelter needs . 
the larger rural and urban housing programs made it possible for aboriginal families to live in low - cost , affordable housing . 
approximately 10,700 homes are rented to urban aboriginal families , and these are owned and delivered by over 100 not - for - profit urban housing societies . 
another 9,100 homes were estimated to be occupied by aboriginal families within the rural program . 
most of them are home ownership . 
it is an estimate that fluctuates and is a source of dispute by many aboriginal leaders . 
these are some of the positive impacts of past federal strategies . 
as well , there are other positive impacts resulting from renovation , emergency repair , senior , disabled , research and demonstration projects . 
for those unfamiliar with the disparities in shelter conditions , a set of charts is attached . 
i will be tabling the attachment . 
suffice to say , honourable senators , the disparities are great but tell little of the hardship of the M é tis , Inuit and First Nations people . 
over one in three aboriginal families are in core housing need , compared to about one in ten non - aboriginal families . 
core housing need is a basic measure of whether a family lives in substandard conditions and cannot afford to live in suitable living space . 
ten years ago , approximately 63,000 aboriginal families lived in core need . 
the population has increased , and the percentage of families in core need remains three times higher than the national average . 
the number of households grows and grows . 
the December 1998 report of the Mayor ' s Task Force on Homelessness in Toronto reveals another impact of failed shelter strategies . 
approximately 4,000 aboriginal people were homeless in 1996 in Toronto alone . 
another 8,000 more were at the risk of becoming homeless , and this included many children . 
there is evidence that Toronto ' s situation typifies the situation in other cities , especially the six other Canadian cities heavily populated by aboriginal peoples . 
one out of five aboriginal people lives in seven metropolitan areas . 
these are bleak statistics , but we will need to look deeper into the impact and outcomes of past federal strategies if we are to learn from mistakes and missed opportunities and to tap the strengths . 
one of these strengths is the evolution of aboriginal housing societies . 
the societies have proven themselves very successful and trustworthy . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Chalifoux , I regret to interrupt you , but your 15 - minute period has expired . 
are you requesting leave to continue ? 
senator Chalifoux : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Chalifoux : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
hundreds upon hundreds of volunteers have given much of their time to these societies , and the dozens of dedicated staff have managed the construction and upkeep of their housing stock , and services to their tenants and applicants . 
the urban portfolio alone is now worth more than $ 500 million . 
a variety of services are offered by staff , and other services are accessed by the extensive network set up among aboriginal service organizations , including such services as Aboriginal Head Start , cultural activities , training and job placement , and friendship centre services and activities , where they are available . 
construction and maintenance jobs are created , businesses are contracted , property and income taxes are paid , and , most of all , some families have a chance to get on their feet and then move on to the private market . 
we had a family , a single parent with six children . 
for the first time I can buy oranges for my children . " 
they are waiting for this chance . 
it is a wonderful way to strengthen their identities , a key to keeping young aboriginal people away from the bad situations many youth find themselves in , and it keeps them in school . 
modest accommodation in better neighbourhoods has given peace of mind and a sense of security to women , children and the older aboriginal people . 
these outcomes do not make headlines , but they have made many lives better and they have created a capacity and desire to do much more . 
there are still poor relations between aboriginal peoples and some local governments , but they may improve over time . 
at least shelter issues and housing societies have created a starting point for dialogue , if nothing else can bring them together . 
aboriginal housing societies also possess something rare . 
they are the only institutions that have an up - to - date profile of aboriginal families and a way of easily reaching them . 
their waiting lists , coupled with existing tenants , allow them to know something about thousands of aboriginal families and their changing circumstances . 
they are an important tool to coordinating services to the neediest in the aboriginal society . 
what are the choices for a future shelter strategy for aboriginal families and emerging priorities ? 
the disproportionate shelter conditions of aboriginal peoples necessitate action in their own right . 
even so , there are emerging priorities requiring attention . 
recent figures reveal that 46 per cent of aboriginal children under five years of age living in large metropolitan areas live in a single - parent family . 
this is seven times the rate of the general population . 
almost one - third of all aboriginal children live in a single - parent family . 
a woman heads most of the single - parent families . 
a highly coordinated strategy will be required to address the shelter , health , cultural , economic and early childhood needs of these families . 
demographic trends underline the youthfulness of the aboriginal population , and this will continue . 
the number of children under five for every aboriginal woman of child - bearing age is 70 per cent higher than the ratio for the total Canadian population . 
lower wages and higher unemployment are characteristic of all youth , and they are more so for aboriginal youth . 
since the termination of new shelter subsidies in 1994 , aboriginal housing waiting lists have lengthened . 
it is evident that the existing social housing stock cannot or does not take in aboriginal families . 
provinces have cut back or terminated new commitments over the past few years , and there are no reliable figures on the number of aboriginal families in the general housing stock . 
it should be noted that the general housing stock relies on credit checks and income thresholds which screen out most aboriginal families in core housing need from accessing non - aboriginal assisted housing programs . 
the royal commission estimated that 17,000 new units and 37,000 major repairs would be needed between 1996 and 2016 to address the backlog . 
in addition , 21,600 new households resulting from population growth and new family formation would also need assistance . 
with no financial assistance , living standards are expected to fall further , and the actual number of families in core need will rise . 
recent federal decisions have resulted in the transfer of funds and the administration of social housing to the provinces that chose to enter these arrangements . 
Ontario , Quebec , British Columbia and Alberta have now also opted into this transfer agreement . 
these transfer agreements include the rural and urban aboriginal housing programs . 
the transfer process has created considerable conflict and dispute between CMHC and aboriginal housing providers . 
in particular , the urban aboriginal housing societies have advocated direct transfers to aboriginal housing societies through negotiated agreements and a national coordinating body . 
this position is well known and predates the policy to transfer programs to the provinces . 
precedents for this type of arrangement are evident in the labour market training field and the friendship centres , among others . 
arguments against the federal transfers to the provinces are historical , constitutional , and are deeply rooted in aboriginal peoples ' self - determination objectives . 
it also centres on the lack of consultation about these transfers . 
genuine consultation is a cherished principle in the evolving relationship with aboriginal peoples and a principle endorsed by the Supreme Court of Canada in decisions such as Sparrow . 
as well , there are policy and day - to - day operational reasons for the opposition to provincial transfers . 
in fact , there is no evidence to suggest provinces can do a better job in administrating programs than can the urban aboriginal housing societies . 
there has never been any independent evaluation to suggest this either . 
on the other hand , there is evidence that key policies like the level of rent to income paid by tenants can be unilaterally changed at the will of the provinces . 
CMHC has tried to assure aboriginal housing societies that its interests in their housing stock are protected in the transfer agreements and that they will not be worse off in the process . 
these assurances have been very unconvincing . 
they believe they have a right and a well - earned entitlement to make decisions on their own . 
if they chose to enter into agreements with provinces or local governments after , it will be their choice , based on their policies and their programs . 
the choice is whether to reverse the transfer of aboriginal programs and negotiate transfer agreements with the aboriginal housing societies who want them or to leave the federal strategy to transfer responsibilities to the provinces . 
very strong arguments have been made to replace the core need model that measures affordability , suitability and adequacy standards within Canadian society with an aboriginal shelter model . 
for obvious reasons , this model would also include security of family and cultural practices . 
it would better reflect the aboriginal reality when need is assessed and strategies are developed to respond to this need . 
it would allow for future shelter strategies to be created with objectives now being pursued by some housing societies with next to no recognition by the governments . 
these objectives will ensure aboriginal shelter , make allowances for grandparents and elders , spiritual practices and assured access cultural activities , and allow early childhood programs and aboriginal services to access financial and employment assistance . 
the shelter strategy should be better able to protect families from crime and violence because of their aboriginal heritage . 
legislative amendments to the National Housing Act and the Canada Mortgage and Housing Act , assented to June 17 , 1999 , have given CMHC a more powerful tool to provide assistance and to deal with more types of organizations , according to the testimony of CMHC officials in a meeting of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology on June 9 , 1999 . This additional power and authority may be able to assist in the transfer of substantive authority and control to a new aboriginal shelter authority . 
such an approach was the centrepiece of recommendations made by the Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs in 1992 after extensive hearings and consultations . 
among other things , the all - party committee recommended aboriginal shelter funding be delivered through one agency and that the mandate encompass lending , insurance , policy , decision - making , management of programs , research , training , economic development and financing . 
at the recent Assembly of First Nations housing conference , leaders advocated a similar structure to meet the needs of their First Nations people . 
a new aboriginal shelter authority would be independent , with the capacity to implement legislative powers for aboriginal peoples . 
it would also have the ability to enter into arrangements with other federal departments and to coordinate or bring training and employment services , early childhood development services , health , education , and business development assistance to thousands of families . 
such a strategy would also free housing societies to do more with the same budgets . 
the difference between the federal borrowing and lending rates would be used to finance more homes , best practices research and management . 
it would also allow for the development of new services and mortgage products to help aboriginal families . 
these services might include the purchase and maintenance of student and medical accommodation through the better use of an estimated $ 200 million in federal expenditures for these types of accommodations . 
honourable senators , the transfer of these federal duties can be accomplished without new legislation . 
it would likely be necessary for the Prime Minister to exercise his authority under the Public Service Transfer of Duties and Rearrangements Act , formalized with appropriate transfer agreements . 
in the long term , new legislation can be prepared and passed to recognize the existence of local aboriginal housing authorities with unique legal characteristics , powers and duties . 
these local authorities will no longer be not - for - profit corporations and would be able to create businesses and jobs in their communities . 
they will be expressions of aboriginal self - determination . 
whether to implement a holistic and courageous aboriginal strategy or to tinker with the existing federal strategy is a choice for the decision - makers . 
the government is discussing the grave circumstances of families at risk becoming homeless or who are homeless , including the aboriginals . 
we believe the existing aboriginal service delivery system in big cities is the key to any assistance strategy for the aboriginal homeless , and any new monies for services should flow through that system . 
research strongly indicates the imminent requirement to develop a strategy and an action plan to implement solutions for this critical need . 
since Health Canada has declared an adequate home a determinant of basic health , homelessness is a problem that requires immediate action . 
we must take a hard look at the recommendations from previous studies , inquiries and testimony to offer specific advice on this matter . 
the recommendations and the action plan will assist the minister responsible for homelessness . 
this inquiry must not be shelved . 
we , as Canadians and parliamentarians , have a responsibility not only to address this urgent need but to develop an action plan that will give all aboriginal families their proper place in Canadian society . 
aboriginal housing societies have the expertise . 
they only need an opportunity and a jurisdictional transfer to do their job . 
honourable senators , may I have permission to table the attachment I mentioned ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Chalifoux : 
thank you . 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 5 
Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
current Farm Crisis 
leave Granted to Adjourn Under Rule 60 to Consider Matter of Urgent Public Importance 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
committee of Selection 
fourth Report Presented 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
ninety - eighth Conference in Ulaanbaatar , Mongolia - Report of Canadian Group Tabled 
official Languages Act 
availability of French Services for Francophones Outside Quebec - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin As Chief Justice 
national Defence 
restructuring of Reserve Units in Atlantic Canada - Plight of the 1 st Field Regiment of the Royal Canadian Artillery 
the Senate 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities 
human Resources Development 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities in Government 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
foreign Affairs 
new Ambassador to World Trade Organization - Possible Consulting Contract with Firm Employing Former Ambassador - Request for Tabling 
finance 
devaluation of Dollar - Influence on Foreign Purchases of Canadian Companies 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
the Environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites 
national Defence 
Nova Scotia - Funds for Cleanup of Flood Damage in Cumberland County 
business of the Senate 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Debate Adjourned 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee - Motion in Amendment Adopted 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Materials and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Debate Adjourned 
consequences of European Monetary Union 
foreign Affairs Committee Authorized to Engage Services 
foreign Affairs 
changing Mandate of North Atlantic TreatY Organization - Budget Report of Committee on Study Adopted 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry 
current Farm Crisis 
consideration of Matter of Urgent Public Importance Pursuant to Rule 60 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , November 3 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
current Farm Crisis 
leave Granted to Adjourn Under Rule 60 to Consider Matter of Urgent Public Importance 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I rise today to request that an emergency debate be held on the crisis in agriculture . 
my understanding is that I must convince His Honour and my colleagues that there is an emergency at hand . 
i wish to say at the outset that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry has heard testimony for over a year and one - half from representatives of farm groups , particularly from Western Canada . 
they appealed to us on the basis of the problems they currently face . 
i believe that our committee listened well to those presenters because they had serious presentations to make . 
the Premiers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan felt somewhat rejected in the response they received from their recent discussions with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance . 
there is a serious sense of alienation and desperation in Western Canada . 
i will not get into the numbers today because they have been well voiced in this house and were spoken to yesterday . 
however , the human tragedy that is occurring in the West is very serious . 
i spoke to people last night who are manning the stress phone lines . 
they indicated to me that there have been eight suicides . 
the most recent case concerned a man whose wife left him because of the stress , and the husband committed suicide , leaving behind four children . 
honourable senators , we are all grown and responsible people in this Senate . 
this subject is so serious that it calls into question our ability to represent the regions we do and our duty to the entire nation . 
honourable senators , there are many areas about which I should like to speak . 
however , I believe the subject of human tragedy is one of the most important . 
we must make an appeal on that basis . 
time is of the essence . 
this is an emergency and it is important that it be dealt with now . 
the economic crisis , as it exists , does not affect only the farm . 
it is now affecting machinery dealerships , manufacturing and employment . 
every machinery dealership is a small factory . 
they recondition tractors and other farm implements . 
when farmers have no money , those places go broke and people go without jobs . 
the government will have to pay employment insurance to those people . 
it is crucial that we not let this continue , that we deal with it quickly and effectively . 
i should like to speak about the repercussions of this crisis in the rural municipalities . 
a dozen rural municipalities have voted to withhold their taxes . 
i talked to the reeve of the Municipality of Wellington , which is north of Weyburn , Saskatchewan . He said it is not the case that farmers do not want to pay their taxes ; rather , they do not have the money to do so . 
this situation is impacting the entire province of Saskatchewan in many industries . 
honourable senators , I want to speak about the impact of this situation on the entire nation . 
this will not impact only Saskatchewan , Manitoba and parts of Alberta ; it will impact all of Canada . 
as well , this is not happening only in Canada ; it is happening around the world because of subsidies , et cetera . 
we know all the reasons . 
a newspaper article states that after a nine - day delay , President Clinton signed an agricultural agreement containing $ 8.7 billion in emergency farm aid . 
in response to that , the agriculture committee chairman said : 
i ' m glad the president signed this important bill , though I don ' t understand why he delayed for so long . 
honourable senators , this is a very serious situation deserving of debate in this house . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. The Speaker : 
i wish to remind honourable senators that the rules provide for five - minute interventions by each speaker and 15 minutes of debate in total . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise in my role as Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in that the matter is left to the discretion of the Speaker , I wish to be very careful in what I say . 
honourable senators , we received notice of Senator Gustafson ' s intention to raise this matter . 
we have listened to him and are quite prepared to leave this matter in the hands of the Speaker , as that is what the rules provide . 
i have no extraordinary comments to make . 
i would observe , however , that what Senator Gustafson has mentioned about the work of the Senate ' s Agriculture Committee is something of which we are all well aware . 
we are happy to leave the decision on whether this constitutes a matter of urgent public importance to the discretion of the Speaker , as required under the rules . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
are you in favour or not ? 
senator Hays : 
i do not wish to presume to tell the Speaker what to do because I respect the rules . 
i believe that the discretion of the Speaker should be exercised on the basis of what he has heard . 
senator Kinsella : 
do you have no opinion ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
is there a crisis or not ? 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , although I do not have the credibility on this issue that Senator Gustafson has , I am a farmer ' s daughter from the Interlake region of Manitoba . 
the farm crisis has been discussed for months . 
during this period , farmers have been pushed to the limit because of the cost - price squeeze in which they are caught . 
costs are beyond the control of farmers . 
prices are set in international markets and also beyond their control . 
competition is impossible because of the subsidies paid by the European Union and the United States . 
although almost every farm has one or two off - farm jobs , farmers are deeply in debt and face the prospect of bankruptcy . 
they face losing their land , their inheritance , their source of livelihood , and the way of life to which they are deeply attached . 
honourable senators , personal tragedies are not always the stuff of national emergencies , but I shall list some reasons why the crisis is so urgent as to warrant an emergency debate . 
first , last week , a delegation of farmers and the Premiers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan came to Ottawa to seek help from the federal government . 
they knew it was imperative that additional payments be in the hands of producers by December in order to avoid bankruptcies before spring . 
as we know , the government refused any injection of cash , and the banks will now be forced to foreclose . 
second , the AIDA program , intended to fill a gap in the existing farm safety net programs , is a disaster . 
in Manitoba , more than 55 per cent of the applicants processed to date have received no funds . 
third , the impact of the farm crisis is felt not only by farm families but by virtually everyone in rural communities . 
there are defaults on credit . 
there are fewer purchases of machinery . 
school children are using last year ' s supplies . 
almost everyone is pinching , squeezing and suffering . 
fourth , the level of stress is rapidly increasing among farm families in farm dependent communities . 
you need only read the letters from children to the Prime Minister to know how stressed parents have become . 
the issues were clarified and the crisis highlighted in meetings I have had both here and in Manitoba with desperate farm delegations . 
they were so grateful for the hearing they received from the Senate . 
they are terribly buffeted and demoralized by forces they cannot control . 
how can we here in the Senate watch the situation unravel further without affording their concerns a proper hearing through an emergency debate ? 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , I rise to encourage the Speaker to permit an emergency debate on this issue . 
i , as an urbanite , am much more comfortable with pavement under my feet than farmland , but I look at the importance of our agricultural community from the perspective of someone who was an elected representative in the province of Alberta for eight years and from that of a senator who has met many times with individuals of agricultural background . 
over the years , I have jokingly referred to my farmer friends as " whiners and complainers " and individuals who are never happy . 
it is either the weather , the price of wheat , the amount of the subsidy or , perhaps , the loonie and the value of it when they go for their break in the sun . 
in late August , Senator Gustafson invited me to a meeting here in Ottawa with a group of Saskatchewan and Alberta farmers . 
a number of my colleagues were also in attendance . 
we talked about what they were experiencing . 
these were not outspoken , grandstanding , attention seekers . 
when I looked into their eyes , I saw fear . 
when I listened to their voices , there was the trembling that comes from holding back tears . 
when I considered what they had to say , I became concerned , not only for them , but the farm population of Canada . 
i examined what they had to say , together with what Senator Spivak and Senator Gustafson had been telling me . 
when I saw a graph showing the realized net farm income in Saskatchewan , in 1998 constant dollars , dropping from $ 700 million , in 1993 to 1997 ; to $ 400 million in 1998 ; to minus $ 48 million in 1999 , I understood what they were talking about . 
this is not a situation of individuals coming to government for a bit more of something . 
these are individuals who are at the abyss . 
it involves their survival , and it is now or never . 
we could go on for a long time with statistics , but the fact remains that there is an emergency in rural Canada . 
there is an emergency in Western Canada , and the numbers are incredibly stunning when you look at them . 
a whole way of life is under siege in Western Canada , Your Honour . 
as you come from Manitoba , you can appreciate the situation . 
our rural communities , our control over agricultural resources , the cost of our food and the survival of thousands of Canadians is at stake . 
by way of example , I notice that Senator Hays has had to accept a new job . 
farm income has dropped so much that he has accepted the position of deputy leader in the Senate . 
western alienation , as has been mentioned - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i regret to interrupt the Honourable Senator Ghitter , but the 15 - minute period has expired . 
however , he may proceed if leave is granted . 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
please continue . 
senator Ghitter : 
last week , Premier Romanow and Premier Doer led a delegation to Ottawa to request $ 1.3 billion in federal aid for farmers . 
a great deal of hope was placed on those meetings by Western Canadian farmers , who believed that immediate relief would be forthcoming . 
however , it was not forthcoming . 
the delegation was sent home with nothing but a new set of numbers . 
i suggest that that incident has brought this emergency to the forefront , namely , the fact that western farmers were looking to resolve this matter last week . 
there was no resolution , and we in this chamber must now deal with it on an emergency basis in an effort to get relief to Western Canadian farmers immediately . 
to wait any longer may be too late . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank all honourable senators who participated in the debate to determine whether or not there is an emergency . 
as has been pointed out , the Speaker must rule on this matter . 
i wish to refer honourable senators to rule 60 ( 1 ) , which sets out the conditions which must be met . 
it states : 
60 ( 1 ) ( a ) must relate to a genuine emergency , calling for urgent consideration by the Senate ; 
( b ) must not revive a discussion previously taken up in the same Session pursuant to this rule ; 
i agree with both paragraphs ( a ) and ( b ) that the case has been made . 
the next paragraph states : 
that does not apply . 
there is then the following paragraph , which states : 
( d ) cannot raise matters which form , in substance , a question of privilege . 
that does not apply . 
i then refer honourable senators to rule 60 ( 6 ) , which states : 
60 ( 6 ) ( a ) how it concerns the administrative responsibilities of the government or could come within the scope of departmental action ; 
on that basis , I believe the case has been made . 
the next paragraph states : 
60 ( 6 ) ( b ) give reasons why the Senate will not likely have another opportunity to consider the matter within a reasonable period of time . 
i regret that , under paragraph ( b ) , the case has not effectively been made . 
on the other hand , I have not heard any advice opposing that point of view . 
in relating it to the bulk of the conditions that I must recognize , I have determined that leave should be granted . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank His Honour for his decision , which we respect . 
however , this is not a matter we had anticipated . 
we have committees working this afternoon . 
i wish to raise before honourable senators the request that this debate take place , not as provided for in the rules , namely , at the end of Orders of the Day , but rather , at eight o ' clock this evening . 
this is a day on which we normally have a short sitting to ensure our committees an opportunity to carry out their work . 
we respect the ruling and will be prepared to debate the matter , but our preference would be that this matter be debated at eight o ' clock this evening . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , this house has apprehended that a matter of grave concern to Canada is before us . 
this is an emergency . 
this is not something to be delayed . 
we are to set aside the ordinary course of proceedings such that we may attend to a matter that this side sees as a national emergency , a matter of great crisis and not something to be put off . 
therefore , we would not agree to delaying consideration of this matter . 
we wish to deal with it at the end of Orders of the Day before other matters . 
i recognize , honourable senators , that the matter of - 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is making a speech . 
i have asked for leave and I have given the reason for asking for leave . 
i think a simple " No " is all that is required if leave is not forthcoming . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , that is not correct . 
obviously you did not read His Honour ' s decision of yesterday . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , it is not quite as simple as that . 
part of the matter raised by the Deputy Leader of the Government relates to the issue of business before certain committees . 
i wish to respond to that issue . 
if there is a special need for the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications to sit even though the Senate is sitting , we on this side would be in agreement to granting that authority . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , leave is not granted to change the rules . 
the rules are clear that the urgent debate will take place after consideration of the Orders of the Day or , if they are not concluded in time , at eight o ' clock this evening . 
honourable senators , I wish to draw your attention to rule 60 ( 4 ) . 
under that rule , it is clear that " the Speaker shall , instead of calling ` Senators ' Statements ' , recognize the Senator or Senators who gave notice ... " 
in other words , the emergency debate supersedes " Senators ' Statements " . 
the paragraph states ` instead of calling ' . 
there will be no " Senators ' Statements " today . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have the power to sit at 3:30 p.m. today , November 3 , 1999 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee of Selection 
fourth Report Presented 
hon. L é once Mercier : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the fourth report of the Committee of Selection on the nomination of senators who will sit on the various committees during the present session . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is that agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Mercier , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to introduce Bill S - 9 , to amend the Criminal Code ( abuse of process ) . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Wednesday next , November 10 , 1999 . 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
ninety - eighth Conference in Ulaanbaatar , Mongolia - Report of Canadian Group Tabled 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I have the privilege of tabling a report from the inter - parliamentary delegation to a meeting of the Asia - Pacific Group of the Interparliamentary Union , which was held in Ulaanbaatar , Mongolia , from July 26 to July 31 , 1999 . 
official Languages Act 
availability of French Services for Francophones Outside Quebec - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the situation vis - à - vis the development and vitality of francophone and Acadian communities , its gradual deterioration , the growing indifference of governments in Canada over the past ten years , and the lack of access to services in French . 
i will take this opportunity to table my report entitled " De la coupe aux l è vres , un coup de coeur se fait attendre . " 
question PERIOD 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin As Chief Justice 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , since there were no Senators ' Statements today , I will pose a question . 
it is a very happy , cheerful question which I will ask of the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
will there be some kind of special ceremony to celebrate the special event which has just taken place ? 
i refer to an event which is historical in our nation and in the world - the appointment of Madam Justice Beverley McLachlin to the position of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
would the honourable Deputy Leader of the Government not agree that some statement must be made on such a great occasion ? 
the Senate is the guardian of tradition and the Senate has the sensitivity to address the occasion . 
i do not wish to debate the matter , but other senators may wish to say some words about this major historical event . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I received that news just now and am very pleased to hear it . 
the honourable senator ' s question could be interpreted in several ways . 
he is asking for an opportunity today , presumably now , for senators to say something on this important occasion , one which would normally be addressed under Senators ' Statements . 
i agree , and I think I speak for senators on this side , that a few minutes could be taken now to comment on the announcement . 
following the precedent of my homologue , the Deputy Leader of the Opposition , I will take this opportunity while I am on my feet to indicate my great pleasure and pride in hearing that the Honourable Beverley McLachlin will be succeeding Chief Justice Lamer on the Supreme Court of Canada . 
justice McLachlin has a very distinguished record as a lawyer and a judge . 
all of us who have had the privilege of practising law are very proud of her . 
as far as we are concerned , leave is granted for others to take a few moments to comment on that important event . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , leave is requested to have comments now on the subject raised by Honourable Senator Prud ' homme . 
is leave granted ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
No. 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
do we have instructions on how that will impact on Question Period ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Forrestall : 
i did not mean to withhold consent . 
i was just curious how that proposal would impact on the time available for Question Period . 
national Defence 
restructuring of Reserve Units in Atlantic Canada - Plight of the 1 st Field Regiment of the Royal Canadian Artillery 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it goes back to an issue which I discussed with his predecessor regarding the restructuring of reserve units in Canada . 
some units were listed as viable and others were termed non - viable . 
without complicating the question too much , there is no doubt in my mind that I was seriously misled . 
i have chosen to believe that it happened because three or four different people were responding to the request for information . 
i refer to the 1 st Field Regiment of the Royal Canadian Artillery based in Halifax . 
that is a unit with which the minister will be very familiar and , indeed , as a Nova Scotian , somewhat proud . 
that unit received a 93.1 per cent effective strength rating and an efficiency rating of 88.5 per cent . 
there are 15 or more reserve units in Canada which are termed non - viable . 
however , none of them have anything like that for a record . 
this has driven quite a wedge between the reserve structure in Canada and the present government , for reasons such as this I suspect . 
i feel that this unit deserves an apology . 
i can think of none better than the minister responsible for Nova Scotia to proffer such an apology . 
i am not asking for prolonged negotiations on this matter but for an apology for the mistake , however it may have been made . 
will the minister now ask for a reassessment of the score given to this historic Nova Scotia unit in the re - evaluation process ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it has been my experience that the government has been most supportive of the important role played by the reserves throughout the country . 
i have some particular knowledge in my own area where we will be commissioning , if you will , two very impressive facilities in Sydney , Nova Scotia for use by the reserve . 
i understand that these will make a real difference to the functioning of the reserve in the area . 
the unit to which the honourable senator refers , the 1 st Field Regiment Royal Canadian Artillery , is a distinguished unit and one of which all Nova Scotians can be proud . 
i beg his indulgence for a short period of time while I make inquiries of the minister on this very point . 
i hope to be able to respond to Senator Forrestall in a manner which the question deserves . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , far be it from me to speak for the regiment . 
on the other hand , Lieutenant - Colonel Doyle in his comments a few months ago suggested that he felt the least that could be done would be an apology from the LFC , which might go a long way to smoothing out the matter . 
they should be re - established as a viable unit . 
in fact , they are , perhaps , one of the most viable units in Canada . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for the information he has provided . 
i certainly take seriously the record of service of the particular regiment to which he refers . 
i will attempt to familiarize myself with the details of the situation and respond in an appropriate manner . 
the Senate 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last week , I had the opportunity to attend a conference in Ottawa . 
at that time , I remarked that the Government of Canada has failed miserably in providing opportunities for visible minorities in the public service . 
according to the latest employment equity report , of the 190,000 people employed in the Public Service of Canada , only 9,200 have self - identified as members of visible minorities . 
this is about 5 per cent or less than one - half of the 11 per cent which visible minorities represent in Canada ' s overall population . 
here , in the Senate , the latest statistics that I have are that 1.2 per cent of employees are members of visible minorities . 
we in this house of sober second thought are lagging far behind and have failed in setting a standard of visible minority representation for all business and government bodies in Canada . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us what strategic plans , if any , are being developed to improve visible minority representation in the Senate of Canada ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the issue is one which is of concern to the government in general , and not just specifically with respect to the Senate . 
in fact , efforts have been in place for some time to ensure that the participation of visible minorities across government would mirror their numbers in the workforce . 
that has not been achieved to date . 
however , there are some hopeful signs . 
recent statistics - and I do not have them at hand - indicate that in terms of promotion within the public service , visible minorities appear to be moving up through the ranks in a measure that is equal to their number within that service . 
that is a positive though not an entirely satisfactory situation . 
however , there has been some indication that improvement is taking place . 
of course , we are always striving to ensure that we reach the goal of representation in government and here in the Senate that mirrors the presence of visible minorities in our general population . 
human Resources Development 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities in Government 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate take these representations to cabinet and try to sensitize his colleagues to the important problem of the lack of adequate representation in senior positions within the public service ? 
when the minister finds the statistics to which he referred , perhaps he would prepare a list and bring to this chamber the number of deputy and assistant deputy ministers in the public service of Canada who are members of visible minorities , as well as statistics for the Senate itself ? 
will he undertake to do that ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will certainly bring to the Senate and give to anyone else who may have that specific interest the report to which I referred . 
it is not one on which I can presently place my hands . 
i think it might be of interest to the honourable senator because it indicates not simply the percentage of visible minorities but how those visible minorities appear to be progressing along the chain of command . 
i will undertake to give that information to the honourable senator . 
with regard to the Senate , this is a matter which may appropriately be of some concern to the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , I have never served on that committee . 
i hope that in his role of Leader of the Government in the Senate the minister will show some leadership and bring those matters before this chamber . 
the minister refers to the progress that is being made . 
my specific reason for asking him to produce the list of visible minority deputy ministers and ADMs is that we will then see that the numbers are so few that it will be embarrassing for him to look at it . 
the progress he described refers to progress at the very lowest levels of the public service , something which is a public shame . 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , will the Leader of the Government in the Senate confirm that Canada will vote in the affirmative on the New Agenda Coalition resolution which is now before the United Nations calling for the commencement of negotiations leading to a program for the elimination of nuclear weapons ? 
this is a subject I raised yesterday with the minister . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the honourable senator raising this issue again today . 
i have not yet had an opportunity to speak to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and International Trade regarding this issue . 
canada has a strong record of supporting the nuclear disarmament program , both in general and in specific programs to accommodate the aftermath of nuclear disarmament in terms of hazardous materials which must now be dealt with . 
with respect to the specific question , I do not wish to usurp the position of the minister responsible , and I am confident I can bring that answer to the honourable senator very shortly . 
senator Roche : 
i thank the minister for that answer . 
i would ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate to take a certain sense of urgency in communicating these concerns because the vote at the United Nations will be held the first part of next week . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I recognize the honourable senator ' s expertise in this area and his distinguished record of service on issues involving disarmament . 
i would be happy to receive that material and undertake to him that I will have that discussion prior to the end of this week . 
foreign Affairs 
new Ambassador to World Trade Organization - Possible Consulting Contract with Firm Employing Former Ambassador - Request for Tabling 
hon. James F . Kelleher : 
Mr. Marchi replaced a highly respected civil servant with over 20 years of experience in international trade matters , Mr. John Weekes . 
as you may recall , last year Mr. Weekes was elected to the prestigious position of chair of the WTO ' s General Council , which includes over 130 members . 
a National Post article dated October 12 , 1999 , stated that Mr. Weekes gave his first interview since being ousted as Canada ' s WTO ambassador , and he advised that he was now the chairman of global trade practice for APCO , which is an American consulting firm . 
the article also revealed that Mr. Weekes continues as a senior adviser to the Government of Canada . 
senator Kinsella : 
that is a good question . 
" yes " or " no " ? 
senator Kelleher : 
a simple answer will do . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
thank you , honourable senator . 
i should like to make the answer as brief and direct as I can , but it may require more than a " yes " or a " no " . 
i do not know the former incumbent in the position . 
obviously , he must be a very distinguished gentleman to be able to find accommodation so quickly in the private sector in such an important role . 
i do know the present incumbent , and he has had a very distinguished record , not only in public life , in government , but also in the area of trade . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
the MMT issue was his , was it not ? 
senator Boudreau : 
his record would be generally regarded as a distinguished record . 
with a background in trade and government , he is exactly the kind of individual who would be appropriate for that type of position . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
he voted against free trade , remember ? 
senator Boudreau : 
none of us in this institution would ever want to disqualify an individual from any office simply because he had been engaged in public life , as we are right now . 
i congratulate the government on his appointment . 
as to whether certain contracts exist for consulting services , I am sure that the Government of Canada employs consultants on a routine basis for many purposes . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
people they fire ? 
senator Boudreau : 
whether this is one of them , I do not know . 
if they are employing this consultant , as with any other consultant , I am sure they are getting good value for their money . 
senator Kelleher : 
honourable senators , I can assure the Honourable Leader of the Government in the Senate that Mr. John Weekes is an excellent person . 
at the end of the month , Canada and 130 other countries will meet in Seattle to launch the next round of WTO negotiations . 
since these negotiations could have a profound impact on Canada , it is important for Canadians to have full confidence in how these negotiations are managed in Geneva . 
to ensure transparency and to clear the air regarding the APCO contract prior to the Seattle WTO meeting , will the leader table this contract as well as all supporting documents , including those relating to the tendering and the award of this contract ? 
senator Boudreau : 
he has responsibility for the file , and I would not presume to remove that responsibility from him . 
i shall convey the honourable senator ' s request for more details on that particular contract . 
finance 
devaluation of Dollar - Influence on Foreign Purchases of Canadian Companies 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
there was a hew and cry by many as a result of the sale of MacMillan Bloedel , a long - time Canadian firm , to Weyerhaeuser , a huge U.S. conglomerate that has taken advantage of what many of us believe is the horrific way the government has managed our fiscal and monetary system in allowing the Canadian dollar to devalue to its current rate . 
as a matter of fact , I rode in from Toronto this morning with a young man who says he has always been a Liberal but is totally disgusted as he watches all these corporations being scooped up by Americans and others virtually at half price . 
does the minister have any comment as these great Canadian corporations are being gobbled up ? 
i do not want him to think that I want a return to the dreaded FIRA that was brought in by the Liberal government under Prime Minister Trudeau , but there must be a concern , I believe , when we lose major companies like MacMillan Bloedel . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am very interested in the honourable senator ' s comments . 
obviously , the currency being where it is creates an economic dynamic that can in some cases lead to certain conclusions or events and in other cases to different conclusions or events . 
i am surprised to hear that , as a general rule , people in the resource industry would object to the low Canadian dollar . 
i would think that in many cases it has been a tremendous advantage for them in marketing their products around the world . 
i am not an expert in the lumber industry , but I do know that in many resource sectors the low Canadian dollar has given a tremendous advantage to our producers and , as a result , has yielded great benefits in terms of employment and economic activity . 
the low Canadian dollar has had , at least in some aspects , a positive impact on the resource industry . 
the point , though , is that the low dollar also serves to make some Canadian companies very attractive as acquisitions , to those with American dollars , and makes them a more attractive purchase than they would be otherwise . 
however , the fundamental point with respect to the currency is that we have a floating currency which finds its own level . 
unless we are prepared to consider a fundamental change in the policy of the Bank of Canada , that will continue to be the case . 
with respect to foreign acquisitions , there may be measures other than FIRA that could be put on the table . 
the honourable senator may wish to suggest some of his own . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , the leader speaks of the low Canadian dollar and the resource industry . 
it is really a false economy because in some cases it has led to the country becoming less competitive . 
what it has led to is this horrific and unacceptable lumber quota , which is a nightmare . 
it restricts the development of any industry in a province because if you do not have a quota , you cannot start up a sawmill . 
there is a litany of problems in this regard . 
it is a total horror story . 
honourable senators , in the spirit of short - term solutions , I believe that the government has kept interest rates too low , which has led to the devaluation of this floating dollar . 
as individuals , our global wealth has been reduced in this country . 
at Heathrow Airport it costs 15 pounds for breakfast , which I believe is approximately $ 45 Canadian . 
this is eroding our ability to remain competitive as individuals in a global economy . 
senator Taylor : 
Mulroney started this . 
senator St. Germain : 
listen , you had the chance . 
you were going to get rid of the GST and all these things , but you did not go ahead , sir . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , with the greatest of respect , I would disagree with the honourable senator on a few points . 
senator St. Germain : 
i would hope so . 
senator Boudreau : 
some even have to do with the currency . 
personally , I am not . 
if you are not in favour of fixing an exchange rate and fixing the Canadian dollar higher in comparison to the U.S. dollar , then you must create conditions that will cause the dollar to rise . 
i should like the honourable senator to know that I am in favour of a floating exchange rate . 
i feel it is a great shock absorber in terms of the two major economies , the U.S. and Canada , adjusting to one another . 
i would remain in favour of a floating exchange rate , and I must say that I would have trouble advocating higher interest rates . 
i cannot agree with the honourable senator that increased interest rates would be good for the country . 
i simply cannot accept that . 
many people in the resource industries to whom I have spoken have taken advantage of the lower Canadian dollar . 
however , at the end of the day , the Canadian dollar will find its own level in a floating exchange . 
unless we are prepared to take some very serious and dramatic measures , such as pegging the exchange rate or increasing interest rates , the Canadian dollar will continue to find its own level . 
i would not be prepared to support substantially increased interest rates . 
i do not know if senators opposite are in favour of that , but I do not believe our party is . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a delayed answer in response to a question raised in the Senate on October 13 , 1999 , by the Honourable Senator Lowell Murray regarding Nova Scotia responsibility for the cleanup of toxic waste sites , and a response to a question raised in the Senate on October 13 , 1999 , by the Honourable Senator Donald Oliver regarding Nova Scotia funds for the cleanup of flood damage in Cumberland County . 
the Environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites 
( response to question raised by Hon. Lowell Murray on October 13 , 1999 ) 
the upcoming privatization of the Cape Breton Development Corporation ( Devco ) has raised environmental concerns regarding the rehabilitation of properties inherited or acquired by the Corporation since its creation in 1967 . 
as indicated in the Debates of the Senate of October 13 , 1999 , the liability and work associated with any environmental clean - ups at existing and abandoned Devco mines rests with the corporation . 
indeed , in its annual report ( for the period ending March 31 , 1999 ) , the Devco corporation recorded its best estimate of anticipated future costs of environmental issues related to building demolition , cleanup , earthworks , water treatment , and other reclamation works . 
based on management ' s best estimate of the cost of complying with the requirements of appropriate environmental laws and regulations , and an assessment provided by the Senes consulting firm , the Devco annual report shows an expected cost of $ 110 million for future environmental remediation . 
environment Canada is providing technical and scientific advice to Devco on the present and future environmental issues associated with the corporation ' s operations with the objective of ensuring that cleanup activities meet the requirements of existing environmental guidelines and legislation . 
national Defence 
Nova Scotia - Funds for Cleanup of Flood Damage in Cumberland County 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on October 13 , 1999 ) 
the Province of Nova Scotia is still in the process of evaluating the damages to public infrastructure caused by the storm . 
provincial authorities are well aware of the availability of federal financial assistance under the Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements ( DFAA ) and of the eligibility guidelines . 
business of the Senate 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I believe we are in need of clarification with respect to who , under our rules , are the honourable senators to whom we can pose questions during Question Period . 
it is my understanding that questions are properly put to chairmen of the various committees and to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i believe the first question today was put to the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
had I known that was provided for under our rules , Senator Carstairs and I would have had many more exchanges than we had in the last session . 
it would be helpful if we had clarification as to whether the Deputy Leader of the Government is one of the senators to whom we can put questions during Question Period . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in the absence of the Leader of the Government in the Senate , it has been our practice for the deputy leader to field questions to the extent that he can . 
however , when the leader is present , questions should be addressed to the leader . 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
hon. Marie - P . 
not in a long time have we been presented with such buoyant optimism for capitalizing on the enormous potential of this bountiful country . 
the end of the millennium has given rise to naysayers , cultists and those who fear monger with their depressing predictions and exhortations over the end of the millennium . 
they are no match for the effervescence and vibrancy that we , supporters of this government , feel . 
we are buoyed by Canada ' s accomplishments during the 20 th century , and we rise with confidence and excitement to the challenges of the next century and the next millennium . 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne set the tone for how we cross that threshold into a new era . 
we are neither going blindly into the future nor setting anchor in the past . 
having learned from our errors , we will move on to greater heights . 
we shall remember our past , but not be manacled to it . 
we can , however , influence change , through effort , conviction , determination and through our courage , work , innovation , creativity , motivation and especially by setting limits in order to grow in partnership with other governments , in partnership with the private sector and most importantly by setting an example . 
honourable senators , we can rise to unimaginable heights of achievement in the arts and sciences , in research and development , in social progress , in promoting personal growth and , above all , in fostering a climate of peace and goodwill . 
canada , my friends , is the right place to be . 
through good planning by this government , and sacrifices by all Canadians , the burden of growing debt has been vanquished . 
this is not a vague , ephemeral vision , but a vision grounded in practicality and doability . 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne and the follow - up remarks by the Prime Minister spelled out a framework for action that is not wishful thinking . 
it is already being done and we will build that vision piece by piece , one brick at a time . 
honourable senators , my grandfather was a carpenter in Northern Ontario , in Sudbury . 
we learned as children and grandchildren that growth required our house to be built on a strong , secure and deep foundation . 
this is what our government has given us in the past six years and will continue to provide , because we have clearly understood the Speech from the Throne . 
honourable senators , the foundation is the country ' s restored fiscal health , the elimination of a crippling deficit , and a frontal assault on the accumulated debt . 
our economy is growing steadily . 
unemployment is down , inflation rates are low , exports are up , taxes are starting to go down , and wages are rising . 
it is a mighty big brick , the cornerstone of this government ' s pledge for a robust Canada where opportunity and compassion coexist , where self - worth and human dignity are not sacrificed on the altar of wealth and ambition . 
quite rightly , the strategy to make the vision a reality starts with our children . 
let me enunciate what has already been initiated by this government : the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program ; the Aboriginal Headstart Program ; the Canada Education Savings Grant ; improved childcare expense deductions ; the National Child Benefit for low - and modest - income families ; and non - taxable child support payments . 
in addition , there will be extended maternity and parental leave benefits , federal - provincial agreements on more support for early childhood development , more after - tax money in the hands of families , more family - friendly workplaces , modernization of family laws , significant investment in the National Child Benefit , and enhanced learning opportunities through an expanded Schoolnet . 
i am happy to note , honourable senators , that the enthusiasm and technological attributes of young Canadians will be utilized in meaningful ways , ways that will exercise their abilities and give them exposure nationally and internationally . 
allow me to list only four : first , Exchanges Canada , to give 1,000,000 young Canadians every year the chance to learn about another part of the country ; second , engaging tens of thousands of young Canadian volunteers in community and national environmental projects and to help others improve their literacy skills ; third , enabling young Canadians to apply their energy and talents overseas through international internship programs and in helping developing countries to connect to the Internet ; fourth , hiring young Canadians to help rural and urban communities set up Internet access sites for public use . 
to encourage education , the government has announced , and has already put in place , the Millennium Scholarship Foundation , from which the first $ 100,000 will be awarded in January ; the Canada Education Savings Grants ; the deductibility of interest on student loans ; and the use of RRSPs for training . 
clearly , the vision is off to a good start . 
it means commitments to the environment , trade promotion , investment , research and development , entrepreneurship and partnerships . 
it is leadership that instils optimism and enthusiasm , that activates and propels us forward , that stimulates and encourages us to adapt to new ideas and technologies . 
honourable senators , I have mentioned the cornerstone of the vision , our children and youth . 
i have mentioned our fiscal responsibilities , our obligations to protect the environment , and the need to preserve our social programs . 
all of this is jeopardized if we do not generate the right climate in which the corporate sector , both big and small companies , can succeed . 
without investment , without our entrepreneurs , without the skills of a knowledge - based economy , we risk losing our envied position in the world . 
there is so much to lose : a prosperous , diversified , cultural , caring and compassionate community of communities reaching from sea to sea to sea . 
that is why I was pleased that the Speech from the Throne , later expanded upon by the Prime Minister , also focused on trade and investment . 
i was gladdened by the recognition that , in order to keep and attract our best and brightest , we must be innovative in our thinking . 
collaboration between governments , our universities , research institutions and the private sector is vital if we are to remain at the forefront of global competition . 
it is only appropriate , therefore , that the government intends to increase support to research through our various granting councils , such as the Medical Research Council , the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council , and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council . 
the proposal to establish up to 2,000 new chairs for research excellence across Canada is a forward - thinking initiative ; likewise is the plan to create the Canadian Institute of Health Research . 
there was a portion in the Prime Minister ' s response to the Speech from the Throne that sums up the government ' s efforts in promoting research . 
it is worth repeating : 
honourable senators , in presenting a strategy that integrates the economy , social policy and the environment , this government also recognizes that however well meaning its policies and programs might be , they cannot succeed in isolation of the private sector . 
it is the private sector that provides the fuel that drives the economy . 
the government can provide the policy machinery , but it is our business decision - makers who oil the cogs and produce the goods and services for sale at home and abroad . 
we have all heard about the so - called brain drain . 
in presenting its vision of the future , the government has provided the winning conditions to keep and attract the best researchers , the best innovators , the best producers and the best marketers in the world . 
after all , they come from all points on the globe , and who better to help us compete internationally ? 
having chaired a subcommittee that presented its findings in this chamber in June , I am confident in Canada ' s ability to compete effectively in the advancing fields of computer technology . 
that goal , issued as a challenge by the Prime Minister to the private sector , represents a stake of $ 200 billion worth of business . 
there is before us a vision of Canada . 
it is a vision of a modern society , a society built on shared experiences and on values , a society built on a determination to triumph against the odds , to be the best that we can be , a society to be envied . 
honourable senators , this is Canada , this is our Canada , this will be Canada . 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne outlined the government ' s agenda for the new millennium and gave us a blueprint and a list of priorities which reveal that children will be the focus of the coming budgets . 
in part , we will see a series of sensible programs for children , an increase in spending and benefits for poor families and their children , paid maternity leave , housing for the homeless and a national children ' s agenda . 
those are good , sound reasons for government spending in an age of surplus . 
in fact , they are laudable goals . 
however , where is the target date ? 
what are the programs envisioned to end child poverty , and when will we have a national strategy in place ? 
though the Speech from the Throne appealed to those Canadians who see the necessity for social spending , they are disappointed that the government failed to detail a concrete plan to help those most in need . 
as Canadians , what are we doing to alleviate the pain for the disenfranchised people in our country ? 
it takes perseverance , determination , commitment , caring and action to fight poverty in Canada . 
unfortunately , on October 12 , we heard a list of priorities . 
here were men and women committed to building a stronger Canada and a better quality of life for their children and grandchildren . 
as the co - chair of the PC National Task Force on Poverty , I had the opportunity to speak with many individuals and poverty advocates from across the country . 
their testimony reflected the tremendous costs of poverty to both the individuals and to society . 
many witnesses pointed out that programs to reduce poverty will not only improve the circumstances of low - income Canadians today but also strengthen Canada ' s economic and social outlook for the future . 
there is a linkage , honourable senators . 
good economic policy and good social policy go hand in hand . 
you cannot have one without the other . 
honourable senators do not need to be reminded that poverty in Canada has reached epidemic proportions . 
we hear over and over again of the million Canadian children living below the poverty line . 
with winter fast approaching , more and more families face the daunting task of trying to find shelter . 
the Speech from the Throne contained only half a line on homelessness . 
in contrast , on October 26 , The Ottawa Citizen ran an inspiring story about Catherine Luxton , a 10 - year - old girl who recognized the growing problem of homelessness . 
she decided with the help of her father to do something to help those in need . 
the Luxtons have set a goal . 
they will raise money to purchase 50,000 hot meals to distribute to homeless people around the Ottawa area . 
how heartwarming when a young girl recognizes a pressing need in our society and then sets out to do something immediately to rectify the situation . 
why is it taking the government so long ? 
thousands of Canadians live in parks , under bridges , on the streets . 
they are the forgotten citizens of our society . 
homelessness is a real and severe issue facing too many Canadians today ; it is one that I had hoped the government would address at length in the Speech From the Throne . 
mother Teresa cautioned us when she said : 
you and I will be judged on what we do for the poor . 
now that we are in a surplus position , I hope this government will take the opportunity to seriously address the pressing and urgent issue of Canadian poverty before their own so - called judgment day . 
the vision articulated in the Speech from the Throne laid out the direction the government intends to take in the new year . 
i commend the government for having the foresight to recognize that an investment in our children ' s early years is an investment in our nation ' s future . 
however , in order to break the poverty cycle , every child in Canada must be given an equal opportunity to reach his or her fullest potential . 
sadly , they do not have those opportunities today . 
if we could successfully address the social conditions that perpetuate family poverty , honourable senators , we could raise a new generation of children - children who can enjoy life ' s basic necessities , who are healthy , self - sufficient , educated members of Canadian society . 
the Prime Minister has said : 
we must move as quickly as possible from talk to action . 
those are hollow words in light of the fact that , in 1989 , an all - party resolution was passed in the other place to eliminate child poverty by the year 2000 . 
honourable senators , it has been 10 years since that resolution ; yet this government has done shamefully little to fill the empty bellies of the one in five Canadian children who are going hungry . 
as the poverty crisis in Canada grows , this empty promise by the government does not instill much hope for the future . 
the government has promised new investments in the national child benefit , but why , when there is a surplus of funds today , are they waiting until tomorrow to take action ? 
the National PC Caucus Task Force on Poverty , when meeting with poor people from across Canada , repeatedly heard a strong message that the time has come for the federal government to re - index the National Child Benefit to inflation . 
the Progressive Conservative member from Shefford , Quebec , introduced such a motion in the other place last session . 
the Liberal government has unveiled plans to contribute $ 1 billion to extend maternity leave from six months to one year . 
i applaud this initiative and the foresight of the government who acknowledged the importance of mothers and fathers spending time with their children in the first formative year . 
however , under closer review , we must ask who exactly will benefit from this funding ? 
with changes in the labour force , many people work on contracts and are self - employed . 
those people are not part of the Employment Insurance system . 
what is more , this measure does nothing to help people who have been excluded from the paid labour force . 
it does not address the needs of low - income women who will not be able to take advantage of maternity leave if their spouse is not earning a living wage . 
what about the single parent who has to make it on her or his own ? 
i feel confident in saying that unemployed Canadians are not concerned with maternity leave , but are only concerned with how they can put the next meal on the table . 
the United Nations has rated Canada as the best country in the world in which to live . 
yet 5.2 million Canadians live below the poverty line . 
what the people of Canada needed to hear on October 12 was a plan with real solutions to real problems ; the development of a concrete plan of action to eliminate poverty , homelessness and the need for food banks . 
unfortunately , what they received were vague promises within a vague time frame . 
as we enter the 21 st century , I implore the government to take a courageous and bold stance and make a concerted effort and a commitment to raise the standard of living and to turn the vision of the Speech from the Throne into reality for those in need . 
i implore them to close the gap between the haves and the have - nots ; to raise the Canadian child tax benefit ; to raise the income - tax paying threshold ; to re - index the personal income tax system so that gains will not be eroded by inflation ; and to improve the EI program so that it reduces the financial insecurity of Canadians struggling in the new labour market in order to ensure that benefits are available to all who are in need . 
it is the duty of government to provide a decent standard of living for all its citizens . 
the Indian poet Tagore wrote : 
i slept and dreamt that life was joy , I awoke and found that life was duty , I acted and found that duty was joy , I wish the government joy ! 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , in connection with the very recent decision by the Supreme Court of Canada , on September 17 , 1999 , five justices of the Supreme Court of Canada , ruling on an appeal of a decision of the Appeal Court of Nova Scotia , found that , under treaty rights dating back to a treaty signed on March 10 , 1760 , Donald Marshall was not required to comply with fishing regulations . 
i should like to draw your attention to some considerations and to a historical context that were not taken into account by the Supreme Court and show that the 1760 treaty is not valid . 
consequently , the Court ought to reconsider its decision . 
i will quote a memorable extract from this judgment , if I may : 
nothing less would uphold the honour and integrity of the Crown in its dealings with the First Nations . 
such sentiments conjure up visions of knights in shining armour , brave officers , generous functionaries . 
the justices ought perhaps to go so far as to call for a monument to honour the memory of Governor Lawrence , the signatory of the 1760 document , to be erected on the lawns of the Supreme Court , as a lasting reminder of the weight of their decision . 
however , a scant five years before signing this document that has now been immortalized , then lieutenant - governor Lawrence signed another , on August 11 , 1755 , in which he gave instructions to Colonel John Winslow . 
in order to assemble the people and to embark them onto the ships , you must have recourse to the most sure of means , and ruses or force must be employed when circumstances dictate . 
i desire particularly that you pay no heed whatsoever to any entreaties or petitions from the inhabitants , regardless of who it is who wishes to remain behind . 
an ignoble being , puffed up by his military authority , a man who , illegally , of his own initiative , and without the permission of his superiors , gave the order to arrest , detain and deport 15,000 men , women and children , half of whom perished in the process . 
this is the same man who signed the treaty of 1760 . 
let us consider the extent of the error . 
the order openly infringed article 29 of the Magna Carta . 
it infringed the petition of rights of 1628 . 
absolutely nothing would indicate that the Acadian people questioned the British system . 
if some Acadians had committed political misdeeds , no British or other law provided for the punishment of their wives and children . 
nothing other than an order by Parliament could lead to the deportation of a British subject from his country , even if the person were a criminal . 
the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713 and the decree by Queen Anne in June 1713 extended the protection provided by the treaty . 
they provided that the Acadians had rights over their lands and that they could not be expelled without a court decision . 
a member of the executive , a mere lieutenant - governor , should have repudiated a royal prerogative , and this went against fundamental British law of the time . 
in 1729 , Governor Richard Phillips had assured the Acadians in writing of his protection against such action . 
colonel Lawrence acted without orders and ignored all the laws protecting the Acadians . 
not even the King could sign a deportation order , because under the 1297 provisions of the Magna Carta the King was not above the law , and this was even less so in the case of a mere acting Lieutenant - Governor . 
this figure had Acadians ' property confiscated , their homes and fields burned and their animals slaughtered . 
he separated families , which he put on unsafe vessels to be sold as slaves or to be condemned to servitude in the American colonies . 
this criminal deportation and these concentration camps were already being implemented when the treaty of 1760 was signed and extended to 1763 . 
the learned judges inform us that they presume that Lawrence acted honourably in drawing up the 1760 treaty . 
these were the actions of a powerful bureaucrat whose duty it was to protect the Acadians . 
his actions show that he respected neither the treaties nor the British Crown . 
decisions such as these have always been unacceptable , whether in times of peace or war . 
Lawrence ' s actions were barbaric and unacceptable , even from the perspective of 18 th century standards . 
his actions were unacceptable in the past and are just as unacceptable today . 
a criminal should not be allowed to create fundamental laws in a civilized society . 
his reprehensible actions preclude his having any legal or moral right to sign any document on which we might rely today for direction in our modern civilization . 
by basing our laws on anything having to do with Lawrence , we are showing contempt for the memory of our courageous Canadians , our martyrs who fought and died in order to put a stop to the deadly behaviour of people like Lawrence . 
they gave their lives so that tyrants like this would not hold sway over us and enforce the law at gunpoint . 
and here , at the dawn of the new millennium , we are going to officially immortalize Lawrence ' s legacy in the reports of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
this is blasphemy against the memory of our Acadian ancestors and our martyrs , the first Europeans to settle in Canada . 
we are passing a terrible legacy on to coming generations . 
some will say that I have a grievance against the British Crown . 
they are mistaken ; I have a grievance against an abusive psychotic , a disgusting bureaucrat . 
i believe most Acadians think as I do : that this certifiable mental case was acting on his own initiative . 
we all know that Lawrence was not the first bureaucrat in history to abuse his power and to resort to acts of conspiracy , violence and terrorism . 
unfortunately , he will not be the last either . 
i invite the judges to consider the implications of their reasoning . 
to consider the 1760 document valid is to assume that he carried out his general and usual duties with the approval of the Crown and the British people . 
it follows then that he had grounds for deporting the Acadians and that he followed the wishes of the Crown to the letter . 
in recognizing Lawrence ' s legal power to sign legal documents on behalf of the Crown , the Supreme Court recognizes the validity of the deportation order . 
over the centuries , the Crown has swept this illegality under the carpet . 
this is perhaps why the deportation order was never withdrawn and anyone can read it . 
this is perhaps why the Acadians were expressly excluded from the Treaty of Paris of 1763 and this illegal banishment has remained on the books . 
to cancel the order might mean that the action was in fact taken . 
the denial of atrocities has a long history . 
British bureaucrats may well have committed abuses during the long history of colonialization , but never intentionally on such a scale . 
i do not think that the Crown ever approved of the cruelty inflicted on the Acadians . 
in fact , I would like to read a letter I sent to the Consul General of Great Britain in Houston on October 18 , 1994 , which shows that I am not raising this subject for the first time today . 
i will read it as I wrote it : 
i have been monitoring the progress of Warren Perrin ' s petition to British authorities regarding the 1755 expulsion of the Acadians from Nova Scotia . 
Mr. Perrin seeks modest redress relative to the enormity of the tragedy targeted at the Acadians . 
the Acadians were British subjects and entitled to state protection . 
the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht had ceded Acadia to Britain . 
the Acadian community had been firmly established in Nova Scotia for over a century when the infamous deed was committed . 
unfortunately , the British government has never acknowledged the illegality of the expulsion carried out under its name by it ' s colonial representatives whose primary responsibility was to protect British subjects and possessions . 
the passing of time in no way diminishes the gravity of the act . 
the fact that the event happened is a terrible black mark on Great Britain ' s proud democratic history . 
i am sure that most Britains would endorse the universal principle that there is no statute of limitations on crimes against humanity , especially when government employees commit crimes against the country ' s subjects .... 
as a parliamentarian , I appreciate that it is important to acknowledge the mistakes of the past so that such incidents are never repeated . 
the expulsion of the Acadians was a barbaric act of immense proportion . 
it was immoral and criminal ethnic cleansing .... 
the British government has the opportunity to make a universally positive statement for all people of all nations . 
ethnic cleansing , genocide , and the mistreatment of citizens are wrong . 
it may take centuries but justice will always prevail . 
some may say that I have no sympathy with the problems of aboriginal Canadians . 
on the contrary , the Acadians and the aboriginal peoples have been friends from the beginnings of colonial times . 
they have lived and worked together in harmony , and there has been much intermarriage . 
during the deportation , history records that the native people helped the Acadian refugees at great risk to themselves . 
i have no ill feelings toward those who were the sole allies of my ancestors . 
a large number of native people also fell victim to Lawrence ' s intimidation . 
in 1756 , he ordered that hostilities be directed toward the Indians , and offered bounties for the scalps of men , women and children . 
the native people were familiar with Lawrence ' s methods of ethnic cleansing aimed at the Acadians . 
they had seen first hand what happened to people who dared stand up to Lawrence . 
surely , the Supreme Court justices could not imagine any bureaucrat being that uncivilized . 
in a civilized world , a bureaucratic respectful of the law could have produced a document containing what the justices wanted to read into it , but not Lawrence . 
this could have been an opportunity to redress past wrongs . 
they must not think that Parliament is incapable of respecting citizens . 
democracy is a prize won at great cost and deserves the chance to be applied . 
the justices ought to give thought to bringing down helpful decisions , not ones that stir up resentment , insults and upheaval . 
they did not reflect on the consequences their interpretation will have on our coastal villages and on the exploitation of our limited ocean and land resources . 
the Supreme Court decision has already divided two populations that have always lived together in harmony and mutual respect . 
without proper guidance , anger , jealousy , cupidity and racism are terribly powerful forces if they are unleashed . 
many questions have been raised , but few answers have been given . 
the lawyers must be rubbing their hands in glee . 
Lawrence would be proud . 
the purpose of my speech today is not to dwell on the misfortunes of the past . 
this would create a victim ' s mentality that would generate feelings of inferiority , acrimony and indifference . 
it would also not reflect the mentality of Acadians , quite the contrary . 
some may say that the time has come for Acadians to forgive . 
indeed , this is the right thing to do . 
but to forget ? 
never . 
those who forget history are condemned to relive it . 
the international community is just beginning to discuss the possibility of establishing a permanent international criminal court to put on trial those who are guilty of crimes against humanity . 
let me read an excerpt of a speech delivered by the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy at the United Nations , on September 24 , 1999 , which clearly shows that we are reliving history : 
we absolutely need to create mechanisms that hold violators of international law accountable for their actions . 
we must break the culture of impunity . 
the prospect of prosecution and punishment must be a real part of the calculus of those who resort to violence . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , Senator Comeau ' s time is up . 
is leave granted to allow him to carry on ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Comeau : 
cultural genocide cannot be forgotten and the aggressor is never worthy of praise . 
time has not erased Lawrence ' s evil acts . 
he belongs to a group of monsters that must never be revered . 
his name must never be rehabilitated . 
otherwise , who would be next ? 
will they not claim that Lawrence ' s rehabilitation opens the door to their own rehabilitation ? 
i am therefore asking the Supreme Court to stay the Marshall decision until after a duly conducted inquiry into the validity of Lawrence ' s signature on documents of any sort . 
does the law not demand that the honour and integrity of the Crown be maintained ? 
in fact , the judges could refer to a petition for an inquiry submitted by the Acadians in 1760 . 
note carefully the date of the petition . 
this inquiry invalidated any prescription statute that might exist . 
do Acadians not deserve to be defended and not found guilty of the crime that led to their deportation by Lawrence ? 
if Lawrence always acted within the law and with the blessing of the Crown , history shall record that fact . 
otherwise , Lawrence should be condemned by history , as he deserves to be . 
some will dismiss my request for an inquiry as the irrelevant symbolism of a bygone era . 
to them I say that there is nothing more symbolic than our attachment to the Crown , the Governor General , and the red robes of our Supreme Court judges . 
on motion of Senator Hays , for Senator Finestone , debate adjourned . 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the proceedings on the Order of the Day for resuming the debate on the motion for an Address in reply to Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne addressed to both Houses of Parliament be concluded on the eighth sitting day on which the order is debated . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , in trying to understand this particular motion , I could not help but think that the reason the government side would want to limit the number of days - namely eight - to debate the Speech from the Throne is that they are having an awfully hard time finding much in that speech on which to have honourable senators from the other side rise and participate . 
if that is not the reason , then perhaps the reason for wanting to limit this debate results from some other consideration . 
let us consider the reality of our work here . 
i recognize that a few senators have already spoken in this debate and that speeches are limited by our rules to 15 minutes each . 
hence , four senators per day would speak . 
if it were two hours a day , we would have a maximum of eight senators speaking . 
if it were two hours a day , which I have not seen occur since the session started , that would be a total of 16 hours . 
in that scenario , only 32 senators would have an opportunity to speak on what I assume to be , from the government ' s perspective , its whole vision for this session . 
less than one - third of the honourable senators in this house would have an opportunity to participate in the debate on the great vision this government has for the affairs of Canada . 
honourable senators , we must lift up the covers and look behind this motion for limiting debate . 
we should always question seriously the limiting of debate on any matter before Parliament . 
how often do we see the government side bringing in time allocation , a technique to limit debate ? 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
there is a limit of 15 minutes on speeches . 
think of that . 
senator Kinsella : 
that limit speaks directly to the need to examine the effect of an eight - day limit for debate on the Speech from the Throne . 
senator Stewart will no doubt recall the words of the great writer Joseph Joubert , who stated : 
it is better to debate a question without settling it , than to settle it without debate . 
these were documents about which senior people in our business community asked during the summer , when Parliament was in recess and when there would not be much opportunity for debate . 
as a parliamentary democracy , in a bicameral system , which has stood the test of 131 years , notwithstanding the views expressed by some leaders in the other place , I believe that our bicameral system has been an enormous success . 
the practice of freedom and liberty in our country has enjoyed a high degree of success . 
i challenge those who would question that to find a part of the world , or country in the world , or system of governance , in which freedom , democracy and human rights has had a grander success . 
honourable senators , I feel we need to resist any temptation to limit debate under whatever guise such an attempt to limit debate is brought forward . 
therefore , I move , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare , that the motion be not now adopted but that it be amended by striking out the word " eighth " and substituting the word " fourteenth " . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Kinsella ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - Second Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , are you prepared to adopt the motion at second reading ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
before we proceed , honourable senators , could I ask Senator Oliver for a further comment in terms of a precedent and justification for following this practice ? 
i should like to ask the honourable senator if he would elaborate a bit on what he has determined by looking at the rules and comment on what he might have learned with regard to past precedents . 
senator Oliver : 
should the Senate agree to second reading , the matter will be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
i have a motion prepared by the Table which is based upon the precedent of this chamber . 
to directly answer the Deputy Leader ' s question , perhaps I could read that motion so he can see what the precedent has been . 
i will so do . 
by Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator Di Nino 
with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters , in the first session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament , be referred to the committee for its present study of Bill S - 6 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , shall I proceed with the question on second reading ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , perhaps I could ask a question ? 
i was out of the chamber for a moment and I am just trying to catch up . 
exactly what is the honourable senator proposing ? 
he says he will give notice and move a motion to that effect , or is the motion before us ? 
senator Oliver : 
i have not moved the motion because we do not have second reading yet . 
senator Cools : 
senator Oliver : 
it is not notice at all . 
out of deference to Senator Hays , who asked what I had in mind , I read to him precisely what I had in mind . 
senator Cools : 
then perhaps I can put my other question ? 
when does the honourable senator plan to formally place that notice before us ? 
senator Oliver : 
after second reading is granted to the bill . 
senator Cools : 
i believe we are somewhat confused . 
what the honourable senator is saying is that after second reading he intends to move a motion to that effect ? 
senator Oliver : 
that is correct . 
senator Cools : 
that would be quite interesting . 
i thank the honourable senator . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , shall I proceed with the second reading motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee - Motion in Amendment Adopted 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read a third time ? 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
i move that this bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
it seems to me that the question of the constitution of committees is only a day or two away anyway , is it not ? 
senator Oliver : 
i should like to amend my motion by saying " when and if the said committee is so formed . " 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed that the motion be amended ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator Di Nino , that the bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , when and if that committee is formed . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion , as amended ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion as amended agreed to . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Materials and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , I move : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the committee , when and if it is formed , for its present study of Bill S - 6 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , am I correct in my understanding that this is a debatable motion ? 
senator Oliver : 
Yes. 
senator Cools : 
perhaps Senator Oliver could lead off the debate so that we can be clear as to why he is proposing this motion . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , the main reason for proposing this motion is to try to save the time and money of the people of Canada . 
many witnesses gave evidence on a bill that is worded identically to the bill that is now before us . 
that evidence has been transcribed . 
honourable members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs examined all of the witnesses who appeared before the committee . 
rather than calling all those witnesses back , some at public expense , and having that evidence taken again , taking the time of staff and honourable senators , it is my hope that we can incorporate by reference the evidence that has been transcribed , summarized , and widely circulated in order that that work would not have to be redone . 
that is the principal reason for the request , honourable senators . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that this motion is a form of instruction to a committee to act in a particular way . 
the proposition produces a certain amount of difficulty in that the Senate has no knowledge of the matter the honourable senator is proposing because , as I understand it , the committee never reported that bill to the Senate . 
therefore , this house has never had that subject - matter before it . 
thus , the honourable senator is asking the house to give instruction on something of which it has not taken cognizance . 
i am having difficulty with that and I am not sure how to proceed . 
if the honourable senator could give more of his reasoning , I would be happy to consider it . 
in the absence of that , I am prepared to adjourn the debate in order that we can have some time to instruct ourselves further . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , the motion is not an instruction to anyone . 
it is a request to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
it is my information that this precedent has been used on many other occasions in this chamber as a way of getting evidence that is - 
senator Cools : 
it is difficult for us to be debating a motion that we do not have before us . 
you have read it to us , but it would be helpful to have a copy of it before us . 
i am unclear as to precisely what we are speaking to . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , in that there does not seem to be agreement on this matter , perhaps debate could be adjourned and the matter proceeded with tomorrow . 
senator Oliver : 
i am aware that the committee has not yet been formed . 
my motion relates to if and when the committee is formed . 
i do not expect the matter to be rushed to the committee tomorrow , because there is no committee as yet . 
however , it is my hope that this matter will not be delayed indefinitely . 
it is my hope to get this matter before the committee before its agenda is filled with government legislation , which will certainly take priority , in order that , at the discretion of the committee , a few more witnesses may be heard . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I did not interpret the remarks of Senator Cools to mean that she or anyone on this side wishes to unduly delay the motion . 
it seems to me that the motion is in order , but Senator Cools has some questions and I believe that she is entitled to have them dealt with through debate on the motion . 
i understand that Senator Cools would like to have a written copy of the motion . 
as Deputy Leader of the Government I can undertake to the Honourable Senator Oliver that there is no desire on this side to unduly delay the motion . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I would be happy to move the adjournment of the debate . 
i do not believe that an adjournment will cause any delay , because the committees have not been constituted . 
i am concerned because there is an unusual aspect to this motion and I think the chamber should give it a proper hearing . 
if the Honourable Senator Oliver wishes to speak again , that is fine with me , but I am happy to move the adjournment of the debate , seconded by Senator Milne . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am treating these comments as questions to Senator Oliver , in order that we will be within the rules . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , I am in full agreement with the suggestion of Honourable Senator Hays that we adjourn the debate . 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples during its study of Bills S - 10 and S - 12 ( An Act providing for self - government by the First Nations of Canada ) in the Thirty - fifth Parliament be referred to the Committee for its present study of Bill S - 14 . 
the question was put on the motion and it was adopted . 
there is ample precedent . 
on motion of Senator Cools , debate adjourned . 
consequences of European Monetary Union 
foreign Affairs Committee Authorized to Engage Services 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs ( budget - study on the European Monetary Union ) , presented in the Senate on November 2 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Stewart ) 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I move : 
that the Senate concur in the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs presented to the Senate on November 2 , 1999 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
senator Stewart : 
honourable senators , I should like to say a word or two about this report and also , at the same time , anticipating my motion relative to the third report . 
if you will look at the appendix to the Journals of the Senate for November 2 , you will see that an amount of $ 36,000 was approved for the work of the Foreign Affairs Committee on the European Union . 
in the last session , we expended that amount of money . 
we are now asking , in effect , that the unspent money for our NATO study be renewed for the continuing NATO study in this new session , and that an additional amount of $ 10,000 be granted . 
in the case of the first report , where all the money was expended , we are asking for an additional $ 6,500 . 
putting all this together , the situation is that , for the two studies , there is a balance of some $ 64,400 unspent from the last session ' s budget . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I shall put the motion . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the report ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
foreign Affairs 
changing Mandate of North Atlantic TreatY Organization - Budget Report of Committee on Study Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs ( budget - study on Canada ' s relation with NATO and peacekeeping ) , presented in the Senate on November 2 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Stewart ) 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I move : 
that the Senate concur in the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs presented to the Senate on November 2 , 1999 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , it is your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Chalifoux , calling the attention of the Senate to " Shelter Strategy for Aboriginal Peoples " . - ( 
honourable Senator Rompkey , P . C . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
under the inquiry by the Honourable Senator Chalifoux , if no one rises to speak , the item shall be considered debated . 
current Farm Crisis 
consideration of Matter of Urgent Public Importance Pursuant to Rule 60 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , we have reached the end of the Orders of the Day . 
i call on the Honourable Senator Gustafson . 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 61 ( 1 ) , I move : 
that the Senate now adjourn for the purpose of discussing a matter of urgent public importance , namely , the current farm crisis 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I wish to thank His Honour for allowing this debate to take place . 
i am compelled to participate . 
i am not a member of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry . 
i live in an urban environment . 
i know very little about farming , but working as an advocate for people in poverty , I do know about desperation and despair . 
this is what I encountered when I attended a meeting with farmers and farm wives from Alberta , Manitoba and Saskatchewan a few weeks ago . 
i learned of the severe crisis in farming , imminent foreclosures and the devastating effects it is having on farm families . 
this nightmare , honourable senators , is occurring in a country rated as the best country in the world in which to live . 
honourable senators , I wish to share with you now some raw testimony , excerpts from letters we received from farm wives , mothers , parents , grandparents . 
the first letter is from Carol Nicholson , and she writes : 
i am writing to tell you my concerns as a wife and mother about farm life . 
life on the farm used to be enjoyable but has it ever changed ... 
i have been married to my husband , Martin , for 13 years . 
the first few years of farming were not so bad but the last few years have been devastating to us . 
my husband has had to go out and get a job to put food on the table and support the family . 
he is also farming so life has been real hard on him . 
he would get up at 4:00 a.m. and work on the field until 2:00 p.m. , then go to work so he could provide for his family . 
he couldn ' t afford to take time off so some days he would work around the clock with only one or two hours of sleep . 
some nights I would hear weeping and I knew it was my husband because he just couldn ' t make ends meet no matter how hard he tried . 
he just wants his children to have the things other children do . 
this has deteriorated his health with him losing a great deal of weight and he has become so withdrawn trying all possible ways to see the light at the end of the tunnel . 
i love him dearly for this but I want my husband back not a walking time bomb . 
i have suffered severe depression due to the phone calls and harassment . 
i have had to take a job also and now have to leave my 1 year old , 10 year old and 11 year old without a mother figure . 
this is very hard and I cry everyday that I have to leave , wondering if they are okay and if they need me .... 
my daughter Amanda has been having trouble at school , and she has a hard time adjusting to things around her . 
she gets teased at school because she doesn ' t have good clothes to wear or things like the other kids have . 
my son Tyler , has had to see a therapist because he knows times are tough and he worries about all of us . 
he also complains of being sick so he can be near us . 
many nights he would be sleeping at the foot of our bed . 
when asked " why " he said I just wanted to see my dad . 
Joshua , the baby , is small but he feels the tension in the house and he doesn ' t get to see much of his parents together . 
either one or the other . 
he cries when I go to work and tries not to let me out of his sight . 
this is terrible for a child to have to go through . 
so , life on the farm is not easy at all and I sure hope we get help soon . 
my husband and I never see each other which is hard on a marriage . 
my husband has to bundle up the baby and bring him to work for me so he can then go to work . 
who is suffering here ??? 
the child , being shifted from place to place , in the cold , woken up from his nap . 
then you receive harassing phone calls from the bill collectors . 
with the price of grain , who can afford to sell ??? 
the bills won ' t even get paid by those small grain checks ... 
we are all suffering . 
is there anyone listening ????? 
what is happening to our farm families ???? 
the farm children are suffering . 
they don ' t get extra curricular activities like other ' s because we can ' t afford it . 
Christmas and Birthdays are sad for the children and the parents feel guilty always because we can ' t get them anything . 
we had an Education Fund for our children when times were good but had to remove the money to pay the bills . 
now will my children go to college ?????? 
i don ' t know the answer .... 
there is a lot more to tell about farm life but I am only giving the beginning of my story . 
in closing , I ask that you please help the farm families who are suffering . 
help the children who live on farms . 
i want to see my children smile and laugh again , stress free . 
life could be better if the government would just open their eyes and see that there are enormous problems and the poor children are suffering as well . 
another excerpt , honourable senators , read as follows : 
one of the first things that needs to be mentioned is the fact that I must phone the Farm Stress Line ( 1 - 800 line ) to have them forward this fax since we have had no long - distance telephone service because our bill could not be paid . 
we have harvested a whole crop with a lot of calls needing to be made for parts and repairs . 
we borrowed a cell phone for those calls . 
on October 10 an emergency arose and we needed to call a doctor . 
with no local doctor , long distance was needed . 
we could not even call an operator ! 
my mother passed away in July , and with my family in B.C. , I have not been able to contact my family for support or talk to my Dad unless they phone me . 
we have been in a family business for 26 years . 
we operate a 2500 acre mixed farm with a value - added type business processing seed . 
for 17 years both my husband and I worked off the farm to subsidize the farm . 
with both of us working , we had to hire help to farm . 
since the employee took most of what we made , when the employee left after 4 years , we left off farm jobs and do all the work ourselves . 
it has been difficult to keep the lights on this last year . 
Sask Power Corporation has been our most regular collections telephone caller . 
there is a tremendous lack of compassion when you are forced to bare your soul to an employee of a large corporation such as this . 
as always I planted a large garden . 
i spent my summer and fall devoted to that garden , weeding , freezing , and canning . 
my 2 freezers are full to the brim with my vegetables and fruit . 
i feel pride and contentment to think that I am providing a year ' s worth of food for my family . 
when a letter arrived from Sask Power telling me that " service will be turned off without further notice " if payment is not received , I realized that all my work , all my produce , could be ruined with a flick of a switch . 
i can hardly believe that I could be forced to travel to a city and avail the resources of a food bank and have the resources of my own hands destroyed . 
something is very wrong with the picture when the people who produce food for our country literally have bare cupboards . 
i cook and bake all we need for meals , lunches , etc. , but what happens when you run out of sugar , baking powder , margarine , oil . 
what happens when you run out of laundry soap , shampoo , toilet paper ( we haven ' t been buying kleenex ) . 
there are some things you can ' t make . 
we may become vegetarians as we cannot afford the abattoir ' s bill to have our beef butchered . 
another lady writes : 
each year we see our community struggle to hold on . 
each year our tiny community gets smaller and smaller . 
the church can no longer afford building repairs . 
our community centre demands more of our time and donations of food because the membership continues to decline . 
when I go for a walk , I never see anything new , or hopeful , or fresh . 
all I see is things deteriorating , shrinking or dying . 
babies are very rare in my neighbourhood . 
farmers around here are all in their mid 40 ' s to mid 80 ' s . 
and I ask myself , " Why are we doing this ? " 
so I can watch my husband ' s good nature and health be constantly tested . 
so I can watch my children struggle to balance their jobs , school work and extracurricular activities . 
so I can listen as my elderly mother complains because I never have enough time to visit her . 
but yet , I am the person available to serve at the funeral lunches , the bonspiels , the weddings . 
i am the family member who can be there when the surgeries , accidents and deaths all demand my support . 
i can listen to my children as they talk over the trials and uncertainties they have faced , that day , even if it is in the cab of my tractor when they bring me a sandwich . 
especially , if there are thousands more , just like me , who have to leave the farm , where will we all go ? 
are there enough jobs for all of us ? 
will there be enough food produced without us ? 
will the land be farmed in a manner that will still be able to produce food for my grandchildren and their children ? 
that letter is from Judy . 
and this letter : 
we have tried to diversify , but everything requires more money . 
we ' ve also thought of selling out , but who would be crazy enough to buy land ? 
and if so , after all the creditors are paid there wouldn ' t be much left . 
have you checked how many farmers have committed suicide these last 2 years ? 
we used to be proud to be farmers , but now we ' ve been degraded to beggars . 
maybe if we relocated to a Third World country our government would see fit to help us . 
why should we feed the world and be left to starve ? 
why won ' t our government understand , and acknowledge our state of need ? 
please hear our pleas before it ' s too late ! 
honourable senators , I rest my case . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate very much the opportunity to discuss and debate this issue . 
it is a matter of real concern , so I would offer my thanks to the honourable senator who brought this opportunity before us . 
i will begin by trying to bring a little balance to the debate we will hear today . 
i commend my cabinet colleague , the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food , for his concern and commitment to a joint approach for taking action in leading the national response to the financial hardships which surely confront farmers , particularly in the Prairie provinces . 
these hardships confront certain farmers , and I say " certain farmers " because I must also add that the agricultural industry remains quite strong and robust overall . 
incomes in general are very close to long - term trend lines , and agri - food exports have been growing . 
( 1620 ) 
we exported more than $ 22 billion worth of agricultural and food products last year . That 
taken individually , the challenges facing Canadian farmers this past year have not been unique . 
commodity prices , costs , world markets , the economy , and the weather will always see ups and downs , sometimes in the extremes . 
this time , however , our farmers have been subjected to particularly difficult combinations : low commodity prices plus higher input costs ; reduced demand from key markets plus increasing world supplies of key commodities ; less than ideal weather plus floods and droughts . 
under the leadership of the Government of Canada , governments and farmer representatives came together to respond to a problem that is made particularly difficult by the fact that it is not uniform across the country . 
the nature and the intensity of the problem vary according to the region you farm in and according to the crop or commodity you produce . 
that presents a bit of a puzzle in terms of designing a universal solution . 
nevertheless , steps have been taken to respond . 
the Minister of Agriculture has been working closely with the provinces and territories to make improvements to the farm safety net in which both levels of government , together , invest no less than $ 1 billion each year . 
the government has laid the groundwork for long - term reforms that will improve the ability of producers to adjust to the income crisis over time , and that will also help us to respond effectively to future crises . 
this past July , for example , the Minister of Agriculture and his counterparts from the provinces and territories began hammering out a number of issues surrounding the development of a longer - term agricultural disaster assistance program . 
part of that discussion involved ensuring that the long - term program will work effectively with NISA , crop insurance and the province - specific companion programs that make up the current farm safety net system . 
in August and September , at meetings of agricultural exporting nations , the Minister of Agriculture also began the fight to make the international trading system more conducive to higher incomes for Canadian farmers . 
that is the proverbial battle for the level playing field . 
he tabled Canada ' s negotiating position for the coming meeting of the World Trade Organization . 
with support from government and industry , he called for the abolition of export subsidies , for the reduction of trade - distorting domestic agricultural support , and for the opening up of more access to more markets for Canadian farmers . 
these measures are important elements in the overall strategy to improve producer incomes . 
in the meantime , honourable senators , the government has also implemented measures to supplement incomes earlier , to provide easier access to more crop insurance , to provide faster access to savings and loans , and to increase timely cash flow . 
to blunt the impact of reduced incomes , the Government of Canada , in consultation with the producers and the provinces , developed the $ 1.5 billion Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program , AIDA . 
the federal government provides 60 per cent of that funding , with the other 40 per cent coming from the provinces . 
that is $ 900 million , honourable senators . 
it is a two - year program for farmers who are facing critical declines in income . 
the Government of Canada has also delivered on a commitment by the minister to provide farmers with interim AIDA payments - in other words , giving farmers faster access to the money they need , rather than having them wait until all of their calculations are done at the end of the 1999 claim year . 
agriculture and Agri - Food Canada has developed a quick calculation worksheet to help farmers estimate the payment they would ultimately be entitled to receive . 
honourable senators , we are also making NISA easier to get . 
we have considerably eased the ground rules for withdrawals from , and deposits to , Net Income Stabilization Accounts . 
as a result , 41,000 more farmers have faster access to more funds . 
in late June , following consultations with the provinces , the minister announced changes to NISA that make available to our farmers an additional $ 117 million . 
the forecast NISA withdrawals and AIDA payments will make a significant dent in the income drop on the Prairies in general and in Saskatchewan in particular . 
the Minister of Agriculture is expecting that the full $ 1.5 billion allocated to AIDA will be paid out for 1998 and 1999 . 
in addition , more than 105,000 farmers across the country have almost $ 1.2 billion in their income stabilization accounts , which they can withdraw right now . 
that is what it is there for . 
nearly 26,000 farmers have already taken that step , withdrawing over $ 274 million to help them through this difficult period . 
in Saskatchewan alone , as of the end of October , some 13,000 producers had tapped into NISA and taken out more than $ 119 million . 
these are substantial funds that can help many farm families get back on their feet again . 
many of you will certainly understand and empathize with the very difficult problems that flooding and drought can pose for farmers and their families . 
recognizing this , the Government of Canada worked with the Province of Saskatchewan to improve the crop insurance system on which many producers rely . 
to ease the plight of producers , crop insurance was made more flexible , and benefits were increased , sped up and made more accessible . 
new measures were announced this summer giving Saskatchewan farmers up to $ 25 per acre in supplemental crop insurance benefits on unseeded acres , and that was on top of the $ 25 per acre benefit already available for unseeded acres under the basic crop insurance program . 
a further $ 25 per acre was made available to farmers in both Saskatchewan and Manitoba who were unable to seed this spring . 
that assistance is provided as an interim payment under AIDA . 
the federal government also took steps to help farmers manage their income by providing better cash flow as early as possible at end of the growing season . 
i give these statistics in an attempt to balance the debate , not to deny that there are very significant , serious problems in the Prairie farmers ' situation . 
there are serious problems in the agricultural sector ; no one can doubt that or deny it . 
a combination of the things I have mentioned - low commodity prices and the lack of a level international playing field - has placed great stress on this sector of our economy . 
that is why , even as we speak , serious discussions are taking place between federal and provincial representatives . 
just last week the Prime Minister met with the Premiers of Saskatchewan and Manitoba on the issue . 
the federal Minister of Agriculture , Mr. Vanclief , has been in regular and ongoing contact with his provincial counterparts . 
therefore , it is a serious situation and the Government of Canada is treating it as such . 
having said that , I must be forgiven for making a slight diversion in the debate . 
it must be remembered that the agricultural situation and the agricultural sector is an area of shared federal - provincial jurisdiction . 
the solution to the problem will not be found in unilateral action by the federal government . 
for instance , there have been recent reports from Senator Gustafson ' s home province that provincial spending on agricultural support in Saskatchewan has dropped dramatically since the early 1990 s . 
yesterday , Saskatchewan ' s provincial auditor , Wayne Strelioff , reported that provincial spending in the Province of Saskatchewan on agricultural programs had fallen by more than 70 per cent since 1991 - 92 . 
in 1991 - 92 provincial spending on agricultural programs in Saskatchewan was $ 1.2 billion . 
in 1997 - 98 it was $ 251 million . 
however , this is a premier who can come to the capital , make a demand on the Government of Canada that they produce $ 1.3 billion , and do it now , and then leave in moral outrage , without a reference to the record of his own government . 
this is a federal - provincial problem . 
it must be dealt with by both levels of government . 
Mr. Ken Krawetz , the finance critic of the Official Opposition in Saskatchewan , blamed the current farm income crisis on the provincial government . 
when the provincial auditor cited the reduction that was made by the provincial government , he said : 
that ' s the reason our current agricultural economy is in the problem it is in . 
honourable senators , what is happening at the provincial level of government in Saskatchewan underscores the need for a joint federal - provincial approach to this serious situation . 
this is not a matter on which we can seek partisan advantage . 
this problem is too important to the country . 
this challenge is too large . 
the challenge facing Prairie farmers is not imaginary ; it is real . 
the challenge and the problem facing Prairie farmers did not originate yesterday and it will not be solved tomorrow . 
i have given some indication of the efforts of the government to date . 
i hope I have given some assurance of further interest and effort in this very important area by the Minister of Agriculture and the government in the very near future . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , there is no doubt that there is a farm crisis . 
there is no doubt that that farm crisis has existed for a long time . 
what is certain is that from time to time governments have intervened to help the farmers and they have helped at the provincial level and at the federal level . 
what is different today is not the fact that we do not have a long - term answer ; what is different is that the federal government does not view the situation in Saskatchewan and Manitoba , the Prairie situation , as any different from the situation in agriculture across Canada . 
indeed , all of the facts and figures that have been pointed out by Senator Boudreau are , in my opinion , correct . 
i have no reason to doubt his figures . 
it is affecting teachers and doctors and lawyers and gas station attendants and waitresses . 
everyone knows , not that the figures are there , but that the farmers are in trouble - real , deep trouble . 
one year ago the farmers were in trouble , just as part of a long - term issue - the ebbs and flows of the international situation , the export situation . 
however , today , for whatever reason , the farmers are in trouble in a crisis situation . 
a provincial delegation came to Ottawa to ask for help . 
perhaps they could have done more ; perhaps they should have done more . 
they now understand how deeply rooted this problem is and that it needs immediate fixing . 
they came with the expectation and hope that there would be some federal response . 
what was the federal response ? 
" go home , we will look at the numbers again . " 
there was none of that willingness to work together , none of that willingness to look at Saskatchewan and Manitoba differently . 
senator Cohen has listed some of the letters sent to parliamentarians . 
we are all getting letters of desperation . 
honourable senators , the problems in Saskatchewan are not just the result of international farming issues . 
they have been brought about in large part because farming issues , and Saskatchewan farming issues in particular , have been low on the agricultural totem pole . 
there is not , to this day , a national agricultural policy that takes into account the variations or the variables in farming in the various areas . 
we are too timid when it comes to the international arena to put together a national strategy . 
we are always mindful that the farmers in Quebec and Ontario have their own unique sets of problems . 
we know that Saskatchewan and Manitoba have other problems , not to mention the problems of the fruit growers in British Columbia and farmers in Atlantic Canada . 
we blame all our problems on the international situation . 
we can talk about removing subsidies and forcefully pursuing a strategy , led by Mr. Marchi , that the United States and Europe must eliminate their subsidies . 
the fact is that they have not in the past and they will not now eliminate their subsidies . 
yet , we go back with the same strategy . 
we have done nothing new , creative or different . 
our federal leaders must formulate a strategy , as they did with the Cairns Group a number of years ago . 
we made gains in that respect and we are still reaping the benefits in world trade structures . 
where is the new creative thinking ? 
if we do not have a strategy , we will be driven by the Americans and the Europeans . 
nothing I have heard from the federal government indicates to me that it understands that there must be a new way of addressing the issues . 
that was particularly true when we studied the Canadian Wheat Board legislation . 
we left it to the board of directors of the Canadian Wheat Board to solve the problems of Canadian farmers and Western Canada rather than formulate legitimate support systems for farmers . 
for example , what are our marketing policies on grain ? 
the bottom line is that there is no creative awareness within the federal government in particular , and there must be a new way of looking at the issues of farming in the West . 
i cannot say that the premiers were always on side . 
it took an election to jolt some of them before it became clear that this is not an ongoing , long - term issue . 
this is an immediate crisis . 
ministers Goodale and Vanclief are still saying that we can sort the problem out with the existing programs . 
while we are attempting to do that , farmers are going under . 
we will be left with corporate farming . 
it is time for the government to come clean . 
does it wish farming to continue as an exemplary way of life that sustains food production for the rest of us ? 
we can continue to revamp the figures , but the fact is that farmers in Saskatchewan are leaving the land in greater numbers than ever before . 
families are under greater pressure than ever before . 
we will not be able to sustain farming in Saskatchewan if we continue on this route . 
honourable senators , time has run out . 
the speeches have been made in this and the other chamber . 
all parties , other than the governing party , agree that there has been enough talk and analysis and that there must now be real commitment . 
if the Prime Minister or the Minister of Agriculture had given some emergency aid to the farmers of Saskatchewan , that 3.2 per cent of the population , it would have shown them that they have some merit . 
today we do vote counts . 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba will not win on vote counts . 
it does not serve us well to lay the blame on the provinces . 
they will have to shoulder their portion of whatever program is put in place , and they are signalling a willingness to do that . 
the federal government seems to be putting the responsibility on others , and it has yet to do anything constructive . 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate has again said that the government will study the figures and that they are working on committees with the provincial governments and the agricultural community . 
the only party saying that the process in place today is working is the federal government . 
all farming organizations , the provincial governments and , more particularly , the farmers , are saying that the process is not working . 
honourable senators , what will it take for the government to give a hand to those who want to cooperate to ensure that food supplies continue and that Saskatchewan and Manitoba will continue to be part of the Canadian mosaic ? 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I thank the Honourable Senator Gustafson for launching this emergency debate on this important issue . 
i thank Senators Spivak , Andreychuk , Gustafson , Tkachuk and Sparrow who , through the spring and into the fall , frequently asked questions of the government about the problems the agriculture sector , is facing particularly in Saskatchewan and Manitoba . 
honourable senators , it is important for us to realize that when the federal government works with the provinces , farm organizations , farmers , and producer organizations and comes up with a plan , and that plan does not work , not all of the blame can be placed on the federal government , which is all too often what I hear . 
however , this was not a federal government program alone . 
this was a federal government program in cooperation with the provinces . 
the provinces stood proudly with the federal government and announced this program . 
they said that it would help the farmers in need throughout this country . 
regrettably , it has not . 
when the federal government says it must look at the criteria , examine the program and find ways to make the program work , we have to accept that this approach has some validity . 
when the federal government says that it is not the only player at the table and cannot come up with a program with which the other parties to the original program do not concur , we cannot move forward . 
this is not a stand - alone federal government issue . 
the very fact that AIDA is a 60 - 40 program means that the provinces are contributing 40 per cent of the cost . 
one of the major problems faced by many farmers in southwestern Manitoba and in a large part of Saskatchewan was flooding . 
premier Romanow and Mr. Vanclief , the federal Minister of Agriculture , came to an agreement . 
they agreed that there should be an additional $ 50 per unseeded acre . 
what happened in my province ? 
the premier , facing an election , decided he would not sign that agreement . 
the federal government could not proceed without the participation of the province because crop insurance is a joint program . 
it is not a unilateral federal program . 
it is important to examine exactly why AIDA is not working . 
clearly , the criteria set by all the partners were not the right criteria . 
was there malfeasance ? 
was there a deliberate attempt to put into place a program that would not work ? 
no , I do not think so . 
i think Senator Andreychuk is right that a sensitivity to the particular problems in Saskatchewan and Manitoba was needed . 
let us examine why the program started to unravel . 
senators Spivak and Senator Andreychuk brought to my attention the fact that farmers were being forced to pay $ 400 or $ 500 or $ 600 to an accountant to file the application forms . 
clearly that was mistake number one . 
if the particular forms were that complicated , then we should have provided assistance to help the farmers fill them out . 
we did not do that . 
it was particularly unfortunate that we missed an opportunity , as we were going into the university summer session , to hire and train young accounting students to help farmers with those forms . 
we did not do that . 
senator Sparrow pointed out that , in one program , the forms did not even fit into the envelopes provided . 
perhaps that was a different program , but we did not respond as rapidly as we should have to those kinds of details . 
what happened ? 
from a $ 1.5 billion program , $ 900 million of which came from the federal government , according to my most recent figures , only $ 236 million has been spent . 
senator Gustafson : 
it went to the wrong people , too . 
senator Carstairs : 
where is the rest of the money going ? 
senator Spivak : 
it is going to the wrong people . 
senator Carstairs : 
why are these needy farmers not qualifying for these funds ? 
how can we make that money accessible to the farmers ? 
before we start talking about new money , we must get the currently committed money out to the farmers of Saskatchewan and Manitoba . 
i am assured and I am confident that Minister Vanclief is working overtime to do just that - to quickly find the means to get the balance of that money into the hands of the farmers in Saskatchewan and Manitoba . 
we must examine prices . 
we must understand that at no time in our history , in comparative dollar terms , have prices been so low . 
we must work cooperatively , and I do not refer only to the provinces and the federal government . 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate pointed to the reduced contributions of the Saskatchewan government to agriculture . 
i am sad to say that the same situation exists in Manitoba . 
everyone has backed off and decided that we can spend less money here . 
honourable senators , there have been some extraordinarily complex changes in farming in Western Canada . 
we have not yet dealt adequately with all of those changes . 
the only way we will successfully meet the needs of Western Canadian farmers is if the federal government , the provincial governments , the farmers and the producer organizations all work together cooperatively . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I thank His Honour for allowing this debate . 
some of you may not know this , but he did at one time represent a farm constituency with which I am familiar , namely , Ste. Rose , Manitoba . 
i appreciate , too , the comments from the other side , from Senator Carstairs and the Leader of the Government . 
i know their comments are sincerely felt . 
i do not disagree that there has been blame on all sides . 
we do need to work together , but there are a few points still to be made . 
in my opinion , there is not sufficient acknowledgement of the urgency of the problem . 
it is not appropriate to look at present programs ; they are not important now . 
this problem is urgent . 
why is the problem so urgent ? 
the situation is much worse than the 1930 s because these farmers are far more deeply in debt . 
they have spent unbelievable sums of money for machinery and inputs . 
now the banks are ready to foreclose . 
the farmers cannot pay their taxes . 
perhaps the Saskatchewan government did cut their contributions to the farm community by 70 per cent , but the federal government has contributed to the problem . 
when I refer to the federal government , I do not mean just the Liberal government ; I mean the federal government . 
the federal government cut transportation subsidies by 60 per cent to decrease the deficit . 
that decrease was too much too soon , and it had catastrophic results for farmers in Manitoba . 
only the federal government has a tax base sufficient to give that $ 1.3 billion now . 
the provincial governments - no matter what sins were committed by the previous administrations , and there were many - do not have the tax base to help . 
they have been cutting deficits and putting money into health and education . 
now the federal government is expecting $ 60 billion or more over the next few years . 
money is earmarked for the Millennium Scholarship Fund and other things which are important but which do not constitute an urgent crisis . 
as my colleagues have expressed , a way of life is disappearing . 
the whole western agricultural economy is being transformed by vertical integration . 
Cargill and others will take over more and more farms if we continue on this course . 
if we do not want that to happen , we must act swiftly . 
sometimes a sharp surgical stroke is the best way to do it . 
these very productive Canadians are caught in financial strife . 
i want honourable senators to know that they are productive ; there are no inefficient farmers left after all this time . 
yet it seems to be blinkered to the enormous competitive disadvantage faced by farmers who work in a sector which , last year , accounted for $ 26 billion in exports . 
it is not market access that counts here ; it is the price one is receiving for product . 
perhaps market access will help the producer , but not soon enough . 
competition is impossible in an export market where the U.S. and European subsidies are many times the value of what the Canadian government can provide . 
the message the government delivered to farmers via the provincial premiers last week was a surprising one . 
it was a refusal to meet their request for additional aid . 
it was the estimate in July . 
Dwain Lingenfelter , the Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture , calls the federal estimates seriously flawed . 
of course , his views may be seriously skewed as a result of actually working and living in Saskatchewan , by talking to farmers and by paying close attention to a problem . 
on the other hand , the federal people have an advantage , in Rex Murphy ' s words , " of a perspective through a long distance periscope . " 
minister Lingenfelter called the new federal numbers an overestimation of earnings , including AIDA and NISA payments . 
somehow these new estimates show operating costs in Saskatchewan to be reduced by $ 60 million , which is quite a cut . 
they do not know the source of those figures . 
the Manitoba agriculture minister stated that the official federal agriculture forecast for Saskatchewan and Manitoba released in July is still valid because not much has changed in the situation since then . 
however , provincial ministers stated that the $ 1.3 - billion trade equalization payment that they had requested from Ottawa was a modest request . 
the bottom line is that whatever the estimates may actually turn out to be , they cannot alleviate the need for farmers to receive help now . 
they have everything to do with the global economy and trade . 
the price farmers must pay for goods and services has been rising steadily . 
i refer to fertilizers , herbicides , fuel , utilities , insurance and repairs . 
the cash outlays alone are running $ 60 to $ 80 per acre . 
that is before the farmer pays taxes , repairs buildings and pays loans on equipment , which can run another $ 40 an acre . 
when wheat sold for $ 160 per tonne and canola sold for $ 355 per tonne , there was something left over for the farmer at the end of the day . 
this year ' s price for wheat is 24 per cent below the five - year average , and canola prices have dropped by one - third . 
commodity prices have fallen to historic lows for three reasons . 
the first is that production this crop year and last is well above average . 
the second is that demand has fallen due to the world financial situation , especially in Asia . 
the third is that our major competitors , the U.S. and the EU , are protecting farmers from these extreme market conditions through high level subsidies . 
as members of the Agriculture Committee found when we went to Europe , these subsidies encourage overproduction , which gluts the world market and causes prices to fall . 
subsidies elsewhere are a major problem for our farmers . 
since 1993 , Canada has decreased its support to agriculture by 45 per cent . 
U.S. support has increased by 34 per cent , while EU support has remained essentially unchanged . 
the OECD estimates the support payments to producers of all agricultural commodities - not just grains and oilseeds - average $ 17 U.S. per acre . 
in the U.S. , that figure was $ 45 per acre , while in the EU it was $ 362 per acre . 
without additional income support , which the Saskatchewan delegation very correctly described as trade equalization payments , collectively farmers in Saskatchewan will lose an estimated $ 48 million . 
in Manitoba , it is estimated to be $ 100 million . 
no industrial sector could hope to stay competitive against these odds . 
the international subsidy problem must be resolved . 
in the meantime , our farmers must have more federal government assistance . 
the only other choice is to see their land , field by field , surrendered to the banks and multinational companies that can afford to wait until this government stops digging in its spiked shoes or the EU countries lower support to their farmers . 
from our Agriculture Committee ' s inquiries and travel to Europe , we know that hell will freeze over before the latter takes effect . 
if it continues on its same course , the government is choosing an unprecedented option for this country . 
unlike governments in the depression that could not offer much help , there is some money . 
today , the government could afford to carry our food producers over this hump . 
honourable senators , I am speaking largely about Western Canada . 
people in the feather and dairy sectors are doing all right because of supply management programs . 
one could say that the federal government is to blame for this problem , as well as other governments , because cuts to agriculture in excess of $ 1 billion were made to bail them out of their deficit problems . 
why should the government help farmers keep their land ? 
as a westerner , I am tempted to say because it is the soul of a huge part of this country . 
i am talking about the family farm way of life . 
it is as priceless as the French language is to Quebecers , as life on and near the sea is to the people of the Atlantic provinces , and the mountains and forests are to British Columbians . 
i am tempted to put it in terms of culture and heritage . 
however , I know that , in the end , only the numbers will appeal to the government - the number of seats , revenue numbers and export statistics . 
honourable senators , I hope that there will not be too much of a dispute over some of these . 
sometimes you pay $ 2.00 or more for a loaf . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Spivak : 
i am asking for leave . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Spivak : 
by growing 30 bushels an acre , the farmer ' s 160 - acre field yields bread worth $ 342,000 on store shelves . 
the farmers may be facing financial ruin , but many people count on his grain to turn a tidy profit or earn a modest living . 
another important example is the barley producer who is losing money on every acre . 
by producing 50 bushels an acre and selling it to the breweries to make beer , the farmer is producing an enormous amount of tax revenue for federal and provincial governments . 
honourable senators , in closing , I will table some letters from children in our area so that you can read their concerns . 
this is a disaster and it must be alleviated unless we want the entire agricultural economy of the West to be transformed . 
may I have leave to table these letters ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , there is a request by Senator Spivak to table letters . 
is it your wish that the letters be tabled ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , this is a crucial debate concerning the plight of Canada ' s agriculture industry . 
agriculture is a core element of the economy in my province of Alberta , and the farmers in Alberta did not like the insensitive treatment given to the Premiers of Saskatchewan and Manitoba when they made a legitimate representation to the Government of Canada . 
this lack of response by Ottawa hurt all the more in light of the extraordinary surplus being racked up by the federal government . 
farmers and their leaders have been disappointed in the government ' s leadership in not adequately responding to the disastrous situation facing Canadian farmers . 
families are losing their farms , and plants are closing in Alberta and Saskatchewan , with job losses and grave social and economic distress . 
we are witnessing the demise of an entire industry , with devastating impact on Western Canadian communities . 
are we to tell these communities that Ottawa has nothing for them as the government decides what to do with its impressive and growing budget surplus ? 
clearly , these communities need some form of adjustment or transitional assistance from the federal government . 
the industry is being hit hard through the domestic and export subsidies of its competitors in other countries . 
surely , the government must take note of the suffering on the Prairies in devising its strategy for the upcoming World Trade Organization summit in Seattle . 
however , the present circumstances cannot continue while lengthy trade negotiations take place , since they will produce no result in Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba once the agriculture industry has been devastated . 
further federal assistance is needed now . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I enter this debate with some trepidation because , with agriculture , there is little that you can do that is 100 per cent right . 
we have been dealing with the idea of adapting to a free market on the horizon , and also the farm family as not only a business but a home , a way of life and a community , as has already been emphasized . 
it is a difficult problem . 
it is well to remember that only a scant six years ago farm organizations were making trips to Ottawa and Edmonton , where I was serving in the legislature , asking the government to get out of the business of farming . 
i am a member of the Agriculture Committee , and we made trips throughout the West , in particular in Manitoba and Saskatchewan , which have more Prairie land than Alberta , my native province , and where the problem is probably the worst . 
also , as a member of the Agriculture Committee , I toured Europe to try to talk to the European community . 
as Senator Spivak so well pointed out , they do not have much intention of changing . 
what is happening in agriculture is a bit of a revolution . 
the government of the day , which happens to be my government , is stuck with this conversion from aid to farm and food producers on a commodity basis to a form of income insurance . 
that came about quite naturally in Canada because we export so much of our food production compared to any other nation that if we were to try to subsidize the price of our products , wheat , apples or whatever , the rest of the nation would not be able to stand the expense . 
therefore , we came up with an idea which we are hoping will catch fire in Western Europe . 
we did see some glimmer of this in Germany and Scandinavia where , instead of paying the food producers by the unit of production , whether it is a cow or a quart of milk or a bushel of grain , we work out some form of income insurance . 
we tried to use the argument when we talked to western Europeans that , with their method of paying their food producers by the commodity , they were ending up with an abused environment . 
they were ending up with nitrites contaminating their water table because of over - fertilization and the spread of different types of weeds and genetic modification in order to get the grains to produce more . 
they were modifying the grains and so on . 
when you go into reward on the basis of product , as Western Europe and the U.S. are doing , you do a great deal of harm to the environment . 
canada , quite wisely , opted for the idea of income insurance . 
the fact of the matter is that we should not throw out the baby with the bath water . 
income insurance is falling down on the Prairies . 
there is no question that our way of analyzing income is not working very well in Saskatchewan and Manitoba . 
however , it is interesting to see how well it is working in Alberta . 
i hate to say this , because I was in the opposition and threw shots at the government at the time , but they were some of the first people in Canada to come up with the idea of insuring income . 
it has worked quite well . 
certain accidents in geology and geography have given them less of a problem than we have in Saskatchewan and Manitoba , but they do have a way of handling the problem which is better than the other provinces . 
that is primarily because they got to the agricultural producers , and the agricultural producers started to think of income insurance , and not of so many dollars per acre or so many dollars for wheat and so on , which warps the marketplace . 
if you are truly in favour of the free market , you want to design your system in such a way that the free market functions properly , which means of course trying to put in a form of income insurance . 
in that respect , the Canadian government has moved in the right direction with the AIDA package and the other assistance programs we have in place to reward farmers or food producers for saving their money and putting it aside for a rainy day . 
in Ontario , that figure is about $ 15,000 per producer , and across Canada it is about $ 14,000 per producer . 
any system or program based on income requires the farmers to keep track of the accounting in an entirely different way than the farmer has done in the past . 
if the government is guilty of anything , it is perhaps a lack of sensitivity by the bureaucrats with regard to selling a system of income insurance rather than commodity insurance . 
there are no excuses for sometimes being a little unsympathetic . 
the problem may have been aggravated by the government ' s being a little insensitive in responding to farmers and in selling the whole system of income insurance , but you have to imagine the farmers ' point of view . 
they have a feeling of inevitability and hopelessness that is not entirely caused by the government : " If the government could not sell my wheat last year , and it is poor this year , and all I am growing is grain , what will I do next year ? " 
we are not proposing , although perhaps we should be , ways of changing the system so that they can see a future in farming . 
all they can see is competing against Western European and American subsidies and then begging the government to try to come up with the difference . 
the farmers know that any government over the long run will say , " We have to stop this some place . 
we cannot keep rewarding you on a commodity basis . " 
there has to be some sort of revolution in food production . 
the farmer does not know which way things are going ; the opposition says the government does not know , and I have not heard anything from the opposition , either here or in the other place , to suggest that they do . 
honourable senators , I should like to hear more with regard to an alternative - something that goes beyond sober second thought . 
sometimes we have good first thoughts . 
we have our Agriculture Committee . 
perhaps we could be doing something more to come up with an alternative for our food producers , to give them hope and to allow them to stay in their communities and educate their children , rather than just telling them , " We are competing against the Americans and Europeans , and we do not have enough money . " 
that is not a good enough answer . 
it can be argued that income insurance is something like a safety net underneath someone walking on a tightrope . 
if we can get an income insurance system in place so that the farmers themselves , through free enterprise , can think up alternatives , then we will have done something . 
i should like to challenge the Senate to do something along this line , because we have some good and imaginative thinkers here . 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , first , I should like to thank His Honour for allowing us to have this debate this afternoon . 
it took place under an NDP government . 
perhaps that is what solved their deficit problem . 
under the present circumstances , the government and the members across should be able to help stimulate the flow of a little more money from the province , considering that their party is now sleeping with the NDP . 
Melenchuk and Romanow are partners in politics , sit together on the same side of the house , and , so far as the people of Saskatchewan are concerned , are one and the same . 
certainly , so far as the farmers are concerned , they are one and the same . 
as Senator Spivak said , that election jolted Premier Romanow , the Premier of Saskatchewan , to come to Ottawa to ask for farm aid . 
as a Conservative , at least I can look back on Alvin Hamilton and John Diefenbaker and Don Mazankowski and Bill McKnight and Charlie Mayer and Brian Mulroney as people who took sufficient time to understand Western Canada . 
that is not something the present government in Ottawa can say . 
when he was Prime Minister , Brian Mulroney took the time to understand western agriculture , and he understood it well , unlike his immediate Liberal predecessor or , of course , the present Prime Minister . 
my belief is that the Liberals are never interested when commodity prices in Western Canada are going down . 
they are only interested when commodity prices are going up , as they were when oil prices went up and Western Canadians were reaping the benefits of world prices and hence we had the National Energy Program imposed by the Liberals , a program that redistributed billions of dollars all across Canada , money that belonged to the producing provinces . 
they paid the political price then and , despite the little 1993 hiccup , they will pay the political price again . 
the response that we have had to this crisis from the Liberal government has been the AIDA program . 
it is a typical Liberal response . 
it is a welfare program . 
we do not fill out forms . 
that is not what we do . 
however , that is what the Liberal government in Canada expects the farmers to do . 
in 1996 - 97 , net farm income fell 55 per cent nationally , and it dropped another 35 per cent in 1997 - 98 . 
we now have negative figures in Saskatchewan and in Manitoba for farm income . 
what we do not have from the present government is a national agricultural policy . 
what we have instead are temporary band - aids every time there is a problem in Western Canada . 
in the highly populated areas in Eastern Canada , we have marketing boards , a subsidy program paid directly by the consumer to the farmer . 
that is exactly what a marketing board is . 
it is a monopoly . 
out in the West , however , we are fending for ourselves . 
we all know what is happening in Europe . 
they are paying up to $ 8 in some countries for a bushel of wheat . 
European governments are subsidizing this because they cannot sell it for that price . 
they cannot even give it away . 
other countries will not get rid of their subsidy programs any more than we want to get rid of our marketing boards . 
the reason for that is once you have been weaned on subsidies , have grown up on subsidies and gotten rich on subsidies , politically , it becomes impossible to get rid of them . 
that is what has happened in Europe . 
the Americans have joined the fray . 
they have decided to take the Europeans on and are now paying subsidies . 
meanwhile , the poor Western Canadian farmer , exposed to the marketplace , has nowhere to go . 
that is not unusual in the West . 
it is not unusual for a farmer anywhere . 
when he has seen his land fertile and has seen people reaping the benefits of that land by making bread , whiskey and beer , or by exporting at cheap prices around the world , and the land becomes worthless to him , then we have an emergency . 
that is what is happening on the Prairies today . 
senator Taylor said he has not heard from this side about what we should do . 
i am as perplexed as he is at times about what we should do , but I know one thing - we can no longer continue to grow commodities that everyone else in the world is subsidizing . 
we know our economics , and we know that if we give away cars in Europe , we will not be able to make money on cars in North America . 
that is what those countries are doing . 
they are giving away their wheat . 
canada is an exporting country . 
we do not have enough people in Canada to eat all we produce . 
they must be protected because they know how to farm that land . 
we cannot let them all go broke and leave town . 
we need a national program , not based on welfare , but based on an agricultural industrial strategy stating that this land must be put to other uses . 
honourable senators , we must allow for a time of transition . 
i believe there should be 10 years of transition , where we say to the farmer that we will pay so much per acre . 
the farmer will then have an incentive to grow crops that make money during this time because he will make more money . 
let us not deduct the money when we give a farmer the acreage payments if he does well . 
let us make sure that he does very well so he can wean himself off that subsidy . 
that is what we must do . 
we cannot ask the Europeans to get rid of subsidies . 
forget that . 
we all know what happens with welfare . 
people become dependent on it and refuse to get off . 
that is what has happened . 
the Americans have decided to do something else . 
as a Conservative , I believe that a rural way of life is important to a country . 
i do not wish to see people live only in urban centres . 
a rural place is a place to which you can get away . 
everyone says how nice it is to go out into the wilds and go to a park where no one is around . 
you are alone to some extent . 
if you have ever gone to rural Saskatchewan , Alberta , Quebec or Ontario , you know exactly what I mean . 
the rural areas are different and they are important . 
however , they must be economically viable . 
rural people are smart . 
they live in a rural part of the country and survive , which means they are smart and they work hard . 
let us give the farmers something that has some hope attached to it . 
let us not continually say that they are in trouble and that we have this little welfare program for them . 
that will not help . 
they do not want welfare . 
they never have and they do not want welfare now . 
however , I will tell you one thing : 
if we make them dependent on welfare , they will love it . 
Mr. Romanow came here . 
i do not believe I have ever agreed with Roy Romanow , but I agreed with him on this trip . 
the Premier of Manitoba came here at the same time , along with leaders of the opposition and farm delegations . 
they did not treat him well . 
the government did not take their concerns as a high priority . 
we heard the Minister of Finance yesterday and he never even mentioned agriculture , one week after the visit . 
oh , yes , it is important , but in the speech of the Minister of Finance , it is not that important . 
he says , " I have $ 90 billion to spend and I can hardly wait . 
maybe I will give you some tax cuts and pay off a little debt . " 
honourable senators , AIDA is flawed . 
we know it does not work , so we should not try to make something work that will not work . 
we should get rid of it and come up with something that works . 
this was supposed to work last spring . 
it is now fall . 
the farmers in Saskatchewan must get ready for April pretty soon . 
when the government set up this program , farmers applied in the spring and they are still waiting for money today . 
that is not the way to respond to an emergency . 
i hope that even after this debate is over we can continue to debate in one form or another until we come up with a solution that will solve at least some of the problems . 
we can work together more in this place than probably any other legislature in the country because we are here for a long time , health permitting . 
senators on this side know what must be done , and what is being done now is not working . 
we ask that senators opposite have a close look at what their government is doing . 
we ask you to ask your Prime Minister to make a visit to the Prairie provinces and spend some time listening to what the farmers , the municipal governments and the provincial governments are saying because they are close to the people . 
they are worried about their communities . 
we ask honourable senators opposite to do that , and then perhaps you will fully agree with us that there is an emergency in Western Canada and that it must be dealt with immediately . 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , first , I should like to thank and commend the senators who sit on the Agriculture Committee for the stand they have taken in support of the agricultural community in the past year , and certainly previous to that . 
senators Spivak , Andreychuk , Gustafson , Hays and Fairbairn have all played a very important part in trying to bring the message to the government , and to all Canadians , of the plight of the agricultural industry in this country and , in particular , the plight in Saskatchewan , Manitoba and Alberta . 
allow me to commend them for that because there may not be many more kudos in my speech . 
i am not so sure I know what happens when we have an emergency debate . 
i do not know where this message goes , but this is an important debate . 
there is a saying , " If it ain ' t broke , don ' t fix it . " 
well , this system is " broke " so let ' s fix it . 
enough is enough . 
we have heard about plans to do this , to do that , and to change the forms . 
nothing is happening except that our farmers are going broke . 
when this problem arose last November , one year ago , a program was brought forward . 
senator Carstairs says that all the parties agreed , and that there was cooperation with farm organizations and governments . 
yes , there was some consultation . 
the attitude was that the AIDA program funds would go out early in the new year . 
that did not happen . 
senator Carstairs said everyone cooperated . 
that is not a fact . 
i also went to meetings with the Department of Agriculture , including the minister . 
i believed that the program as suggested was fine and would work . 
when the program finally came out with the AIDA forms , it became obvious that the program would not work . 
it is obvious today that it did not work and that it will not work . 
when they saw how the system would work at the farm gate and where the money would go , the CFA withdrew their support . 
not one farm organization in Western Canada - and I cannot speak for the East - agreed with the AIDA program . 
the provincial governments did not agree . 
the money was to be available in the first part of the year . 
the provincial governments were blamed for not coming on side . 
it was said that Saskatchewan would not sign the agreement , but Saskatchewan had made their $ 200 million available , had set it aside in January and February of 1999 . They did not receive the agreement for signing until June . 
what was the federal department doing ? 
why would it take the federal government that long to send out an agreement ? 
the money of the Saskatchewan government , $ 200 million , is there to be sent on a cost - sharing basis . 
it is not being spent because the federal government did not put their own money there . 
time is crucial for the agriculture community . 
we can talk about long - term programs . 
it was a month ago or six months ago . 
let us deal with the crisis . 
let us get that money into their hands . 
we are talking about additional money . 
yes , additional money is needed , but we can save a lot of family farms by spending the money that has already been committed . 
people who are not aware of the problems often ask how long this program will go on . 
they ask if this is a one - time shot or if it will go on forever . 
perhaps it will be needed forever . 
if we are not prepared to provide what is needed , then we must level with the Canadian farmers and tell them to get out , that enough is enough and we will not subsidize them anymore . 
let them go in dignity . 
give them the money and say that that is it , but let the farmers go into other aspects of the community with some type of dignity , not while pleading and begging , not while starving , not while contemplating suicide . 
all those things are happening now . 
we must look at the facts . 
we do not ask how long old - age pensions will be given out . 
we do not give old - age pensions for one year or two years and then cut them cut off . 
when it comes to the agriculture community , however , this extremely important part of our nation , we ask if they will be wanting more money next year . 
do we want an agricultural industry in this nation ? 
we must decide . 
we are in the process of giving away our balances there on world trade . 
we will soon be in trouble in those industries as well . 
there is no question about that . 
then we will not be self - sufficient in our food supply . 
that is the crucial aspect . 
if we let these western farmers go , if we let the international market take over , then it will be argued that we should also let the Quebec farmers go and the Ontario farmers go , too . 
then we will be importing food in this nation . 
i went across this country for years talking about soil conservation , about the destruction of the family farm because of erosion and the loss of top soil . 
i did that because we , as a nation , must be prepared to feed ourselves . 
that is what the European community is doing . 
they insist that they be able to feed themselves . 
canada says that we can bring in products from outside , but that is not the answer . 
we must be able to feed ourselves . 
i wish that Honourable Senator Carstairs was here . 
she referred to the difficulty of the AIDA forms . 
she was right . 
there were 45 or 47 pages of instructions for the 7 - page form . 
senator Carstairs said we should have hired students to help them fill out the forms . 
the Department of Agriculture did provide assistance ; people went across Western Canada explaining how to fill out AIDA forms . 
why did they not just make up a more simple form ? 
no , they would rather spend thousands of dollars explaining how to handle these 47 pages . 
these difficult forms were not sent out until March or April and then they were not widely available . 
the Department of Agriculture told me that I could get the form off the Internet . 
have they never been to Saskatchewan , to a struggling farm ? 
how many of our people at that time were on the Internet ? 
i could not get a form . 
finally , the Department of Agriculture in my community received two forms in May . 
they photocopied them and made copies available to us . 
we are talking now about something being wrong with the agricultural industry . 
we are getting the message that we should get rid of those inefficient farmers . 
the minister says that if someone cannot make a go of it , he should get out . 
that is one answer , but our farmers are not inefficient . 
we got rid of the inefficient farmers 20 or 30 years ago . 
i made this statement before and I will make it again . 
as Senator Spivak knows , if we keep getting rid of those we consider to be inefficient , we will end up with one farmer . 
then we will be saying that he is inefficient and we must get rid of him . 
corporate farming will be in place with full integration , and the farmers will have lost everything . 
in Saskatchewan , in the next 20 years , unless something happens , we will have two communities , the urban cities of Saskatoon and Regina . 
there will be nothing left in the rural communities . 
the small towns have been disappearing and they will disappear completely . 
what kind of province , what kind of country , would let that happen ? 
those are the issues we must examine . 
there is talk about the Prime Minister coming to Saskatchewan and having a look for himself . 
he does not have to go there . 
we have all the people coming here to get the message across . 
that is not enough . 
surely the message is coming across from every source . 
today , the Leader of the Government in the Senate kept passing this message on . 
i am sorry he is no longer in the chamber ; he may not understand the situation . 
there is a problem and the defence being mounted is to defend the action of no action . 
they keep saying , " We will do this and we will do that . " 
in the interval , we are in a real problem . 
we talk about the cooperation of the provinces . 
the money that the provinces agreed to give is there ; we just have to get it out . 
the Minister of Agriculture keeps saying , " There is lots of money in NISA . " 
that is a program into which both farmers and the government put money . 
the figures for August , which are the latest figures we have for NISA , show that 22,000 farmers out of our 58,000 farmers have less than $ 2,700 in that account . 
he keeps saying , " There is lots of money there . " 
for those people who are going broke the money does not exist . 
it is not there . 
as of October 20 under the AIDA program , we had 6,800 claims paid in Saskatchewan . 
however , they are not the farmers we are worried about . 
we are worried about the 30,000 we will lose . 
i have used that figure now for one year . 
we will either lose these 30,000 farmers completely or we will lose the young farmers who are coming up to farm . 
i plead with the Leader of the Government in the Senate to take this message to the government . 
the program which the farm organizations thought was coming out is not the one that is there now . 
that is why they are not agreeing with it . 
we are told that some changes will be made to it . 
it easy to change that program now . 
we can say , " Throw it out and start again . " 
that would be all right , too , except if it takes another year . 
i do not want that at all . 
let us make the changes and get the money into the hands of people . 
there is $ 1 billion . 
get it into the hands of people . 
we will then worry about additional funds as they are required . 
let us help the farmers who are now in trouble . 
hon. Ron Ghitter : 
honourable senators , first , I wish to thank His Honour for allowing this debate to carry on this afternoon . 
it is an important debate . 
i congratulate the speakers who have entered into the debate . 
as one who is not that familiar with farm life , I have learned a lot this afternoon . 
senator Sparrow ' s intervention was excellent . 
many of the things I wanted to say have already been said by Senator Sparrow and others . 
i speak tonight as an urbanite , but as an Albertan , for whom the issues are somewhat different . 
as Senator Andreychuk said earlier , it must be understood that what may be good for the province of Ontario is not necessarily good for the provinces of Alberta or Saskatchewan . The economic circumstances and demographics are different . 
the people are different . 
the closeness to markets are different , and so on . 
as a result , you cannot say that what is good for Canada , with the numbers we have heard today , will necessarily strike a chord in Saskatchewan or Manitoba where they do not have the resources , the population or the economy and strength that we have in Alberta to assist the farmers in what they are doing . 
one could play with numbers forever in the discussion today . 
i do not intend to do that . 
we have all seen them . 
there are certain fundamental questions that must be answered if we are to come to any positive assistance in this area . 
everyone in this chamber may say , " Of course there is ! " 
however , there are areas in Canada , and in Alberta in particular , which may well suggest that the day of the family farm is coming to an end . 
it is easy to romanticize about the family farm . 
it is easy to speak in terms of the community feeling . 
senators Tkachuk , Spivak and Sparrow talked about the importance of the family farm to our communities . 
they spoke about the feeling it engenders in people . 
they talked about the feeling of community and closeness that you do not get in the city . 
they talked about the basic fabric and culture that is created for our country , which is so significant . 
senator Spivak said that the family farm is to Alberta and the Prairies what language may well be to the province of Quebec . She said that the family farm may be what the forests represent to the province of British Columbia and what the fisheries represent to Atlantic Canadians . 
she is exactly right in her comparisons . 
it strikes at the very fibre of the existence and the perpetuation of all that is important to those of us who come from the Prairies . 
when someone asks : " Is there a place for the family farm , when there is globalization , larger companies , and rationalization ? " , 
i , for one , say , " Yes , there is a very important place for the family farm . " 
the family farm is the fibre of this nation . 
it is so important that we cannot let it slip away to lose what is so significant and deeply embedded in our society and our nation . 
if we accept that it is important to maintain the rural communities of this country , and whatever the family farm might mean to different people , then there is one thing that they must have . 
like any business , and it does not matter if it is in the fisheries or in the oil and gas industry , there is one thing that is needed to survive in business . 
any business person will tell you that that one thing is stability . 
if you do not have stability , predictability or a sense of planning so that you can anticipate what will go on next year , then you will always be struggling . 
you will always be wondering and running to the bank pleading for assistance . 
you will always seem to have your hand out because you will never have stability . 
in the years that I have been around in political life I do not think that farmers have had any stability . 
there have been programs in Alberta , as Senator Taylor stated , that have worked . 
there was an assured base and a safety net to which farmers had access to overcome bad weather and all the things with which farmers must deal . 
however , they have never enjoyed a sense of stability that has allowed them to plan and to continue to provide us with the products that are so important and dear to us . 
some of the speakers today spoke in terms of getting into the jurisdictional issue again . 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate said , " The provinces are involved . " 
we have heard that so often . 
we are told , " It is their fault . " 
i could recite to honourable senators from a list I have , which representatives from the Province of Manitoba read when they made their presentation to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture and Agri - Food . 
it goes on for two pages about the federal government programs that have been withdrawn and the amount of money that has been withdrawn from agriculture , and then I hear today that the provinces are withdrawing some money . 
the poor little Province of Saskatchewan is withdrawing money from agricultural aid . 
the Province of Saskatchewan does not have the money to provide agricultural aid , so today the federal government says , " You were supposed to come up with 40 per cent of the aid program , but you did not do it , so the federal government does not have to do anything . " 
that is a cop - out . 
that is not acceptable . 
it is not acceptable for federal or provincial political leaders to say that it is not their responsibility . 
it is everyone ' s responsibility . 
while we are throwing around a few dollars here and there , farm life in this country is diminishing and the crisis continues . 
more and more farms are being foreclosed , more and more farms are going out of business , and young people are leaving . 
all the things we heard about today are real and vital . 
they speak to what is happening in our country today . 
people are nibbling at the issue , not dealing with it . 
they do not want to get into a war of numbers . 
that will not solve anything . 
we need a government that steps forward with a long - term plan to provide stability while working with the provinces . 
honourable senators , this is not new . 
this is not something that just happened yesterday . 
i remember the same kind of discussions and the same type of feeling back in the 1970 s when I was in government in Alberta . 
the general feeling was that it was the federal government ' s fault or it was this person ' s fault . 
while all of this is happening , there are fewer and fewer farmers . 
the problems have been exacerbated , and now we are really in a crisis . 
i am of the view that we have a serious situation in rural Canada , particularly on the Prairies . 
it is not good enough for the Prime Minister to send the premiers back home and say , " Do not worry , because we will decide what the numbers will be in another committee . " 
it may be too late for that . 
we need something as a stopgap until we get to these longer - term plans . 
sadly , I do not see that happening . 
i see a passing of the buck and a battle of the numbers . 
i do not see people coming forward and saying , " What do we have to do to make ourselves wholeand bring stability to this industry ? " 
if it is important enough to do , then we should do it . 
yesterday , Mr. Martin did not even comment on the farm situation when he was talking in terms of the financial projections and what to do with this so - called surplus . 
what about them ? 
why are we not talking about agriculture ? 
why are we always passing the buck and not doing anything about it ? 
honourable senators , it is time for stability . 
the farmers deserve that . 
if we believe in the significance and the importance of our rural community , then we must do something about it . 
it is time that the rhetoric stopped . 
it is time that the leadership started . 
it is time to provide a measure of stability to rural Canada . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to thank His Honour for agreeing that this was an appropriate subject for emergency debate and thank my friend Senator Gustafson for bringing it forward . 
this is not a debate about blame . 
it is about the hardships of today in terms of individuals , in terms of families and children , and in terms of the prospects for tomorrow . 
there are prospects for tomorrow in terms of stability in our agriculture and opportunities in world trade . 
i have listened to all of the speakers . 
every one of them has , with varying degrees of vigour , stated the issue and the factors that bring us here this afternoon to talk about our farmers . 
in particular , I listened with understanding to Senator Gustafson . 
it is not the first time I have listened to Senator Gustafson by any means . 
i have the privilege of being on the Senate Agriculture Committee which he chairs with great ability and heart . 
for those who do not understand the politics of the Senate , it is a place where people with differing political points of view can respect each other and form lasting friendships . 
they also can and do share deep concerns about issues affecting the lives and the well - being of citizens wherever they live in this country . 
that , perhaps , is one of the most unknown strengths of the Senate of Canada . 
no one , honourable senators , who comes from Western Canada , in particular the major agricultural areas of that region , can fail to hear , to see and to understand the pain and the insecurity of farm communities and farm families , of small rural towns and those who do business in them in the hard times , be they extremes of weather , of floods , of droughts , of disease , or the pressures of international trade which cause Canadian farmers to see the price for the best products in the world drop continuously in the face of massive subsidization in other nations . 
we have heard the evidence and the stories from every area of this industry in our Agriculture Committee as we prepared a report for the government on messages Canada should carry forward to the upcoming world trade talks in Seattle . 
our report , " The Way Ahead : 
Canadian Agriculture ' s Priorities in the Millennium Round , " contains strong recommendations for the upcoming talks that begin later this month . 
even more important , though , is that each of us has heard about the hardships and the opportunities on the ground in the West - not in committee rooms here in Ottawa , but in our home areas and in our provinces . 
we have listened to the voices . 
we have looked into the eyes and the faces of those who are in serious trouble through forces well beyond their control . 
these past few months , I have visited all the Western provinces . 
i have heard and talked with a wide variety of farmers - sometimes with colleagues , often on my own in my area of southwestern Alberta . 
there is no question that in Saskatchewan we heard a great deal about the ravages of rain on farms in southeastern parts of that province and in southwestern parts of Manitoba . 
i have spoken with farmers who twice tried to seed their land , only to have it all washed away . 
they are in very hard times in terms of income . 
there will be no crop , and they cannot find jobs . 
some of us here in this comfortable chamber do not realize that because they own their land , whether or not it is producing a single blade of grass , they do not qualify for welfare , and they are worried about their ability to feed their families . 
we heard from some of them last week , as colleagues from both sides of this chamber met with members of the delegation that came to Ottawa from Saskatchewan and Manitoba seeking transitional funding for farmers during the next few years , the period where perhaps sanity will come , at least in small measure , through the trade talks and through a spirit , hopefully , of understanding and goodwill . 
we heard about the Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance program and how it was not working in the manner intended by the federal government and its partners in the provincial governments . 
i should like to put some names and some faces to the people who came here last week . 
this was only a part of the delegation . 
we heard from Leon Lueke , of the Saskatchewan Pork Producers ; Alfred Wagner , of the Pro - West Rally Group ; Noreen Johns , a passionate woman , deeply troubled , from the Saskatchewan Women ' s Agricultural Network ; Don Dewar , from Keystone Agricultural Producers ; George Groeneveld , from Agricore ; Wayne Motherall , from the Association of Manitoba Municipalities , which usually stays out of these kinds of issues , but since the small towns are hurting , the big ones are coming to help . 
we talked to Clay Serby , Minister of Municipal Affairs , Culture and Housing from Saskatchewan ; to Duane Lingenfelter , the Deputy Premier and Minister of Agriculture ; and to Ms Donna Harpauer , MLA , of the Saskatchewan Party . 
from Manitoba , we talked to the leader of the Liberal Party , Dr. Jon Gerrard , who is an old friend from his period of time when he served as a member of Parliament in the House of Commons . 
clearly , we who must speak on behalf of that region in this house should not focus entirely on the statistical warfare that erupted from the discussions that took place last week . 
we should not let ourselves be distracted from what truly is the main event , which is to make the maximum effort possible to help the farmers in difficult circumstances . 
i believe , honourable senators , that we will have a response , and we will have it very soon , to amend existing programs , to get money out , to listen to the farmers who said that $ 900 million was great except it did not come fast enough and it did not go out in a way that did the most good . 
we must respond to that , honourable senators , and I have every confidence that we will . 
i believe that there will be adjustments and changes and commitments to make the programs work . 
much has been said today about the question of whether anyone cares . 
we must ask ourselves , has this country become so insensitive to its history and its present that we can ignore what is happening , not in the mainstream , not on television every night , not in our big urban centres , but across some of the most incredible reaches of our country that we would trade for nothing in the world ? 
it is for that reason that we can never give up on our farm community . 
we do care . 
in today ' s world , we know that agriculture is one of the most volatile of all industries and that there is an urgency . 
as I said , the government and the Minister of Agriculture will be responding with changes very quickly because , honourable senators , we do not want to lose that way of life as it has been described today . 
we want to secure it . 
we want to expand the opportunities for our farmers , not for multinational companies . 
we want to strengthen the connecting links between our rural communities because they are indeed the heart and soul of our regions and of our country . 
i come from a wonderful little city called Lethbridge . 
i love it dearly , but I also love those little towns around it in the agricultural area that bring prosperity and strength to this small city in my province - towns like Coaldale , Picture Butte , Stirling , Taber , Warner , Raymond , Magrath , Cardston , Stand Off on the Blood Reserve , and our historic Fort Macleod , which contains so much of the history of the RCMP , and up into the mountain passes , through Pincher Creek , and Brocket on the Peigan Reserve . 
those are the places of agricultural strength in the land from which I come and where my grandfather and grandmother were pioneers . 
it is useful to reflect sometimes on what Canada was like out there at the beginning of this century . 
there were no big buildings and factories . 
there were farms and there were people who came from every part of the world in tiny , brave groups . 
my own maternal family came up from the dust bowl of Iowa to find something better , and they settled , Senator Gustafson , around North Battleford , Saskatchewan , which is where my mother was born . 
that is what gave our country its foundation . 
today , a century later , we are communicating through technology , through computers , but when it comes right down to it , across those distances , what the folks in those small towns really want is to see and talk to and listen to another human being . 
that is one thing that anyone who serves in a legislative chamber in any part of this country forgets at his or her peril . 
we forget it at the peril of the unity of our nation . 
people want to have the human connection . 
with all the glory that technology brings , it does not replace the human connection . 
therefore , as I said at the beginning , honourable senators , this debate this evening has indeed been about people . 
despite the skepticism of some of my friends opposite and some of my colleagues on this side , I do believe that people remain the prime consideration and the priority of this government and this Prime Minister . 
it will respond and he will respond . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before we hear the Honourable Senator Gustafson , the rules are silent on the matter of six o ' clock during an emergency debate . 
nevertheless , I felt that it would be the wish of the Senate that I not see the clock , so I did not interrupt the Honourable Senator Fairbairn . 
i presume it is your pleasure that I not see the clock . 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I will not be long . 
i first wish to thank His Honour for permitting this debate . 
i think it was an admirable decision . 
i also wish to thank senators on the both sides of the house . 
this is a day when I am proud of the Senate because I think we are beginning to do the work that should be done in this place . 
we have a very serious problem in our agricultural community and it has been recognized by speakers on both sides of the house . 
there have been misunderstandings , but those who sat on our Agriculture Committee will know - and I will go so far as to say - that the government was not completely to blame in bringing in the AIDA program . 
i stand to be corrected , but it was really fashioned by the Federation of Agriculture . 
it was done on the spur of the moment to deal with the hog situation . 
hogs were selling at Torquay , Saskatchewan , for $ 10 apiece . 
however , it did not work for the rest of Canada and it did not work for the farmers producing grain . 
that program did not work at all ; therefore , it must be changed . 
honourable senators , Saskatchewan does not have the tax base to meet a 40 - 60 split . 
i will be very frank . 
Alberta has the money to meet that commitment . 
they could even pay more . 
Alberta farmers will get more , but what happens in Saskatchewan ? 
additionally , there was talk about the provincial government being negligent . 
they were . 
they balanced their books on the backs of the farmers . 
they took our GRIP payment . 
Alberta received $ 58,000 per farmer in the last year in which the GRIP was paid , Manitoba received $ 43,000 , and I received a bill for $ 320 on my farm . 
anyone who says that would not have some impact is wrong . 
we are now talking about the mistakes of the past , and we cannot let that happen again . 
agriculture is an important industry to Canada . 
my grandfather came to Saskatchewan in 1905 . 
they simply do not have the money to pay them . 
we must make some decisions and , as Senator Sparrow said , those decisions must be made quickly because seeding comes early . 
when we talk to farmers and the farm groups , what do they say ? 
they ask what they should do next . 
the question is how many farmers will be able to seed a crop ? 
that is a very disheartening thing . 
that barely paid for the fuel to take the crop off . 
that scenario can be repeated again and again . 
there are farmers who have crops that are frozen . 
they are getting 88 cents for frozen wheat . 
farmers are getting $ 2.05 a bushel for durum wheat , while their American counterparts are guaranteed $ 5.50 a bushel . 
how will they survive ? 
i am not even sure they should . 
one of the major problems in the world today is that the countries that need the food have no money . 
at one time , Canada had boats filled with wheat leaving from Vancouver heading for Russia , and the wheat was never even ordered . 
those boats were just sent off , and the wheat was automatically purchased by the Russians . 
however , Russia is broke today . 
the Russian government has no money to buy wheat . 
the agriculture minister from Russia appeared before the Senate committee and told us exactly that . 
i could name other countries . 
the problem is global . 
at the meetings in Seattle , which begin on November 29 and continue until December 4 , I hope that a measure of common sense will be applied to this global problem . 
more important , the Government of Canada and we in the Parliament of Canada must deal with this major global problem . 
we all know of countries that cannot afford to buy the food but would gladly eat it if they had that food . 
this is a major problem . 
it is a sad day when we have the ability and the machinery to produce like we have never been able to produce , but we do not have enough common political sense to feed a world that is hungry . 
no one has been able to figure that out . 
a number of senators presented cost figures . 
take rye , for example . 
i profess to be a teetotaller , but look at the money in taxation that is made out of rye whiskey - 79 cents a bushel . 
barley and wheat are other examples . 
is this important to Canada ? 
i say it is important . 
i commend the senators here today . 
each of us has a job to do . 
we must and we will build a better Canada . 
in closing , honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 4 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Senate recommend to the Government of Canada that it pay $ 1.3 billion immediately to western farmers , as requested by the western premiers . 
this payment should be made through the Canadian Wheat Board in the form of an acreage payment . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Gustafson , I regret to inform you that I am unable to accept the notice of motion at this point , unless there is unanimous consent . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
have we not suspended the sitting ? 
this is a special debate , which does not entail any motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i cannot accept a notice of motion unless Senator Gustafson requests unanimous consent . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
we have asked for leave . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I believe that we should reflect upon some considerations . 
first , the motion for which Senator Gustafson wishes give notice involves the expenditure of money , and I am wondering if that is appropriate . 
senator Gustafson : 
it is a recommendation . 
senator Hays : 
in addition , my understanding is that with the emergency debate , there is a motion of adjournment , and that when the Honourable Senator Gustafson takes his place , the matter is adjourned . 
therefore , I would question the order of giving a notice of motion in the course of an emergency debate . 
senator Kinsella : 
are you denying leave ? 
senator Hays : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the notice of motion is not accepted . 
honourable senators , it was moved by the Honourable Senator Gustafson , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cohen , that the Senate do now adjourn . 
under rule 61 ( 3 ) ( a ) , the motion is deemed adopted . 
therefore , I leave the Chair to return at two o ' clock tomorrow . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 6 
Thursday , November 4 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Anthony Gustave Vincent 
tribute 
world War II 
fifty - fifth Anniversary of the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin as Chief Justice 
remembrance Day 
the Late Greg Moore 
tribute 
remembrance Day 
world War II 
fifty - fifth Anniversary of the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin as Chief Justice 
possible Closing by Ontario Government 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
national Defence Act DNA Identification Act Criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
possibility of Transferring Accident Investigation to Transportation Safety Board 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
possible Transitional Fund for Farmers Wishing to Change Careers 
request for Program to Keep Farmers on the Land 
agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program - Allocation of More Funds - Request for Clarification on Minister ' s Statement 
request for Financial Support for Alfalfa Dehydrators 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Effect on Local Economy 
possibility of Transitional Fund for Fishers Wishing to Change Careers 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
committee of Selection 
fourth Report Adopted 
distinguished Canadians and Their Involvement with the United Kingdom 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
the SENATE 
Thursday , November 4 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Late Anthony Gustave Vincent 
tribute 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I learned only yesterday of the death of former ambassador Anthony Vincent . 
i know that many honourable senators knew him . 
Mr. Vincent was born in England . 
he finished his education in the United States and joined Canada ' s department of external affairs , as it was known then , as a diplomat . 
he had a distinguished career which took him across the world , including most recently to Spain and Andorra where he served as our ambassador . 
he also served as our high commissioner to Bangladesh and as our ambassador to Burma . 
he served in the missions of Canada in The Hague and New Delhi . 
however , it was during his time as ambassador to Peru that he became a hero . 
in 1996 , Mr. Vincent played a major role in the hostage situation at the residence of the Japanese ambassador in Lima . 
we believe his actions saved countless lives . 
he was awarded the Governor General ' s Meritorious Service Medal for his extraordinary contribution to the resolution of that crisis . 
he was a gracious and modest hero and an admired servant of Canada . 
he exemplified Canada ' s role as an important contributor to a more stable and better world . 
honourable senators , I wish to join the Right Honourable Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs in offering condolences to Mr. Vincent ' s family , in particular to his wife Lucie and daughter Alexandra . 
world War II 
fifty - fifth Anniversary of the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I should like to pay tribute today to all Canadians , those living and those who have left this earth , for their service to our great nation through the profession of arms . 
additionally , I want to say a very special thank you to those Canadians now serving abroad on peacekeeping missions . 
this afternoon I should like to speak specifically about the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence , that scenic expanse of ocean that blesses the shores of Quebec , New Brunswick , Prince Edward Island , Nova Scotia , and Newfoundland and Labrador . 
it is an interior Canadian waterway now , and many Canadians might think that it has always been so , but in 1942 , it belonged to the Nazi Germany U - boat service . 
this morning , through the auspices of our gracious Speaker , we had a ceremony in this chamber , a ceremony of remembrance , commemorating the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence , 1942 to 1944 . 
for the purists , of course , only two boats were lost after 1942 , both in 1944 - thus , it is the fifty - fifth anniversary - but to most of us who perhaps know naval history better , the battle of the gulf was , in fact , in 1942 . 
honourable senators , the ceremony this morning , presided over by Her Excellency the Governor General , was fitting and warm , and we had amongst us a large number of Canadian merchant seamen who fought in those waters to defend our country . 
the German U - boats found the convoys crossing the Atlantic to be relatively well - guarded in 1942 , with the American entrance into the war , and decided to prey upon coastal waterways of North America in search of easier prey during what the U - boat crews termed the " American Hunting Season " or the " Happy Times . " 
honourable senators , the U - boats sank 2.5 million tonnes of shipping in six months along the North American coast . 
the first seven months of 1942 almost cost the allies the war . 
it is said that the U - boats had so many targets that they went home simply because they had run out of torpedoes . 
while the Battle of the Atlantic raged on the high seas , the U - boats slipped into the Gulf of St. Lawrence , often in sight of land , and searched for unescorted merchant ships . 
in May of 1942 , the battle of the gulf began . 
the German U - boat U - 553 was actually spotted off Cape Ray on her first gulf patrol . 
in the next five months , 21 ships were to be sunk and an estimated 200 mariners killed . 
in 1944 , two more Canadian war ships were lost , and an estimated 91 people killed . 
the first victim was the steamer Nicoya - the first ship sunk in inland Canadian waters , I might add , by hostile forces since the War of 1812 . 
sadly , she was not the last . 
among the many others , the HMCS Raccon , an armed yacht , was lost to U - boat 165 on September 6 , 1942 , and the Corvette HMCS Charlottetown was sunk by U - 517 only five days later . 
then on October 14 , tragedy struck the ferry Caribou , which of course was the ferry linkage between mainland Canada and Newfoundland . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Forrestall , I regret to have to interrupt you , but your three - minute period for statements has expired . 
senator Forrestall : 
i am sure honourable senators understand that it is Canadians we are appreciating here today . 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin as Chief Justice 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak of the announcement yesterday that the next chief justice of the Supreme Court of Canada will be Madam Justice Beverley McLachlin . 
i think Canadians all across this land were delighted to hear the news , but I think that women were particularly exhilarated - the word is not too strong - to learn of her nomination . 
she is the first woman to be the chief justice of our Supreme Court . 
what was exhilarating was that she was not named because she was a woman ; she was named because of her excellence . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Fraser : 
she is the quintessential Canadian . 
how much more Canadian could you possibly be than to have been born in Pincher Creek , Alberta ? 
she was called to the bar of Alberta in 1969 and she has done just about everything there is to do in the Canadian legal system . 
she practised law in private practice from 1969 until 1975 . 
she was a law professor at the University of British Columbia from 1974 to 1981 , and then she started on the very bottom rung of the court system , at the County Court of Vancouver in 1981 . 
she did not stay on the bottom rung for very long . 
then , 10 years ago , in 1989 , she was called to the Supreme Court of Canada by Prime Minister Mulroney - one of his better decisions , I dare say . 
madam Justice McLachlin has proved refreshingly difficult to label . 
it has not been possible for even intensely ideological commentators to classify her as belonging to one or the other judicial school since the announcement yesterday . 
everyone has simply had to say that this is a judge of first - class calibre , of wonderful mind and of independent spirit , who does not naturally fit into any tidy boxes . 
one of the most interesting commentaries came from the President of the Canadian Bar Association , who said , " She has a Canadian willingness to just do it , to break it down into bite - sized pieces and get on with it . " 
although I am not a lawyer , I have had to spend a fair amount of time reading judicial decisions over the years , and I must say that , as a former journalist , I am also exhilarated to see that we have a chief justice who carries on in the fine tradition of good , clear , plain judicial writing . 
it is important for the citizens of this country to be able to understand what their Supreme Court tells them , and when Madam Justice McLachlin writes , there is no doubt that you understand what she is saying and why . 
she also said something recently to the Canadian Bar Association : 
parliament , with its superior fact - finding tools and access to opinions and information , is the most appropriate forum for decision - making of a political nature , using political in its most noble sense . 
this is important , I am sure . 
remembrance Day 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , as you know , next week ' s November 11 ceremonies will honour our veterans and military personnel . 
we all hope that Canada - and indeed the world - will see a time of relative peace and freedom throughout the next century . 
today , I want to honour those Canadians who have made sacrifices in the name of freedom . 
i have my own connection with the First World War . 
my father served with the Canadian Expeditionary Force , the 46 th Queen ' s Battery , in the much hallowed Battle of Vimy Ridge on April 9 , 1917 . 
additionally , at Acadia University , where I went to school , there is a residence on the campus , Willett House , that contains the Milton Gregg Lounge , named after one of Canada ' s most famous and indeed bravest of soldiers . 
the late Milton Gregg was one of 19 Canadian winners of the Victoria Cross , which he won at Cambrai , France , during the week of September 28 to October 1 , 1918 . 
it is sad to say that there are too few veterans of World War I , World War II and the Korean War still with us today . 
as of March of this year , Veterans Affairs estimates that there are only 669 veterans of the First World War , 390,230 veterans of the Second World War , and 17,783 veterans of the Korean War . 
it is incumbent upon us to honour these Canadians so that their sacrifices and great deeds will remain in the Canadian memory forever . 
i want to turn for a moment to the men and women of the Canadian Forces who bravely serve today , whether here at home or overseas on peacekeeping operations . 
too often , we forget to show appreciation and gratitude to the brave military personnel on active duty . 
they have earned our respect time and time again , and we must find ways to show them that we care . 
honourable senators , to all those Canadians living and to those who have passed on , we give our eternal thanks and remembrance . 
hon. Calvin Woodrow Ruck : 
honourable senators , I , too , rise to speak with respect to Remembrance Day . 
i humbly request that , as you observe Remembrance Day , you bear in mind that we , the minority element in the community , also served our country , and we look forward to serving our country in many respects as time marches on . 
we are prepared for any eventuality in terms of preserving the democratic principles that this country expounds . 
the Late Greg Moore 
tribute 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I rise today to pay tribute to the loss of a great Canadian , Greg Moore . 
i had the honour of representing the riding of Mission - Port Moody , the home of Terry Fox , one of our great Canadian heroes , and the area of Maple Ridge , the home of many fine athletes - for example , Cam Neely , a hockey great ; Larry Walker and Greg Moore . 
on October 31 , on a race track in California , a horrific accident took place . 
Greg started his racing career on his father ' s dealership lot , which is Maple Ridge Chrysler , on the Lougheed highway . 
it was located in the area that I represented . 
i often drove down that road , because my office was located there when I was a member of Parliament and a cabinet minister in the other place . 
i saw this young man , in his early years , driving his go - karts , and so on , around the dealership . 
i also knew his father and other members of his family . 
Greg came to prominence at an early age , racing with such great people as the Villeneuves , the Filipoldis , Andrettis and Paul Tracys of this world . 
he made his mark . 
to many of us , he was a hero . 
he was a hero to many young Canadians . 
he was not only a congenial , nice young person , but he was also a young man who was always prepared to make appearances at schools for safety programs and other things relating to driving and the profession that he had chosen . 
i should like to offer to his family and all his friends - and , I am sure that all of you do , too - our deepest sympathy and condolences on the loss of this great Canadian . 
remembrance Day 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
as Senator Forrestall and others have alluded to , this morning in this chamber there was a moving ceremony with regard to the Merchant Navy . 
i wish that more of my colleagues had been here . 
if they had been here , they would not have left this chamber dry eyed , I can assure them of that . 
i want to thank His Honour for his efforts in having this place used as a venue for the ceremony , and for taking part in it . 
i hope we can do this every year in remembrance of the Merchant Navy . 
if you had been campaigning in Newfoundland , particularly rural Newfoundland , as I have been , you would have seen on various walls any number of the following list of pictures : 
Joey Smallwood , the Pope , the Queen , John Kennedy , and a picture of the Caribou . 
she went down during the Second World War . 
many of my people died on that ship . 
she became a significant symbol of the Merchant Navy and a symbol of those who were commandeered and those who went willingly to do their bit for the war effort , even though they were not in uniform . 
the ceremony this morning acknowledged and celebrated them and witnessed their contribution to the war effort . 
honourable senators , I hope that we will all take the opportunity on November 11 to participate in our regions to commemorate those who fought and died to make this country what it is today . 
world War II 
fifty - fifth Anniversary of the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , as my colleague has just referred to , this morning , at eleven o ' clock , we were all invited by His Honour to attend a ceremony , held in this room , commemorating the fifthy - fifth anniversary of the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence . 
to give you an idea of the importance and the impact of that historic battle , I should like to share with you the words of the Honourable George Baker , who took part in the ceremony . 
he said : 
this year , we commemorate a little known phase of the Second World War that took place right inside Canada . 
it is an incredible tale of the men and women who defended our shores , seas and skies in the Gulf of St. Lawrence between 1942 and 1944 . 
many , including members of the Royal Canadian Navy , the Royal Canadian Air Force , Canadian and Newfoundland Merchant Marine , Allied service personnel , and Nursing Sisters , lost their lives doing so . 
fifty - five years later , it is with pride and gratitude that we salute those defenders and their fallen comrades . 
they fought valiantly for peace and freedom . 
they died protecting their home and native land from direct attack . 
innocent civilians perished with them . 
many were denied a known and honoured grave by the fortunes , and misfortunes , of the war . 
Mr. Baker also reminded us that : 
we have a duty , not only to remember , but also to pass along this story to future generations . 
honourable senators , we do indeed have that duty . 
today ' s ceremony represented one of the ways in which we can honour veterans who fought in the Battle of the Gulf of St. Lawrence for , this morning , in this very chamber , a commemorative distinction was proclaimed . 
our Governor General , Adrienne Clarkson , was here . 
she joined the veterans of the Battle of the Gulf , men and women who were among those who made sacrifices . 
there were also families and friends of those who lost their lives . 
my heart was warmed when I looked to the gallery and saw hundreds of school children there . 
behind us were sea cadets , air cadets and army cadets . 
they , too , came to remember and to be part of this very special ceremony . 
our young people are the ones who must carry this legacy of our veterans into the future , lest we forget . 
it is up to the older generations of our society to encourage the newer generations to remember . 
as members of Parliament , as Canadians who may have personal memories of the Second World War , and as those who have lost friends and relatives , we have an added duty in this regard . 
one way we can discharge that duty is by being present at such occasions as this morning ' s ceremony of remembrance . 
i hate to add but I must ; I felt a little ashamed this morning to note that only 15 senators were present in the chamber . 
the veterans and the children looked down at some 80 empty seats . 
named Among the Top Twenty Canadian Heroesof the Twentieth Century 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , over 90 years ago , when Anne of Green Gables was first published , few thought it would turn out to be one of the most beloved works of fiction in Canada ' s proud literary history , but there is no question that Anne is part of our nation ' s cultural fabric . 
she transcends generations and boundaries in this country and around the world . 
it is amazing to think that today , almost a century after Anne was first published , young people can still look to her character as a positive role model . 
Anne of Green Gables was , of course , the work of Islander Lucy Maud Montgomery , a woman who also gave us many other fascinating works during her literary career , including the novels on which the current television series Emily of New Moon is based . 
recently , a project sponsored by the Dominion Institute and the Council for Canadians saw Lucy Maud Montgomery named one of Canada ' s top 20 heroes in the last century . 
as Islanders we know this to be true and , through Montgomery ' s writings , others can discover it as well . 
l . M. Montgomery is a literary treasure and Prince Edward Islanders are proud that she is one of them . 
now we know other Canadians are proud as well . 
supreme Court 
appointment of the Honourable Beverley McLachlin as Chief Justice 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I wish to congratulate Honourable Justice Beverley McLachlin on her appointment to the position of Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
i am delighted with the news of this appointment , which is to take effect on January 7 , 2000 . 
as honourable senators are aware , this is the first time a woman has achieved this highly prestigious position within the Canadian constitutional system . 
madam Justice McLachlin is an excellent jurist , who has risen through the ranks to this highest rank of Chief Justice . 
after teaching law and working in private practice , she was appointed successively to the Supreme Court of British Columbia , and the BC Court of Appeal , then returning to the BC Supreme Court as its Chief Justice . 
she was appointed to the Supreme Court of Canada in March 1989 at the age of 46 . 
she has left her mark in a number of areas of law . 
we are fully aware of the great importance the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms occupies in our lives and of the enhanced role of our court of last resort . 
justice McLachlin was also awarded honourary degrees from the University of British Columbia in 1990 , the University of Alberta in 1990 , and the University of Toronto in 1995 . 
i wish her every success , a success that is well earned , as she attains the summit of judiciary power and contributes to the edification of the cathedral of Canadian jurisprudence . 
possible Closing by Ontario Government 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , living in French in Mike Harris ' Ontario is not easy . 
the Montfort Hospital case is still before the courts . 
we have been waiting for five months for a decision on the fate of this Ontario francophone health institution . 
and now the Harris government is preparing to eliminate another francophone institution , but this time in the area of education . 
it will be the Coll è ge d ' Alfred , the only college in Ontario offering training in agri - food sciences in French . 
the Harris government is again provoking its francophone minority , which will fight to save this institution it took the community 50 years to build . 
the francophones of Ontario have the right to exist , live and work in their language . 
eastern Ontario has a large agri - food industry , which must be protected at all cost , and that includes keeping the Coll è ge d ' Alfred . 
once again , Mr. Harris and his government will have to be dragged before the courts to ensure justice is done . 
it is bloody hard and tiring work ! 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) presented Bill S - 10 , to amend the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 . 
criminal Code 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to reintroduce a bill from the previous session , Bill S - 11 , to amend the Criminal Code to prohibit coercion in medical procedures that offend a person ' s religion or belief that human life is inviolable . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Perrault , bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 . 
Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association 
Canadian Delegation to Subcommittee Meeting on Future of Armed Forces Held in Ankara andIstanbul , Turkey - Report Tabled 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Aur é lien Gill : 
honourable Senators , I give notice that on Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the situation of Aboriginal Peoples , to enable us to take stock and consider appropriate measures for the future . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
another Sea King had problems with its hydraulic system this week . 
we know that to border on the catastrophic , particularly if you are in the air . 
honourable senators , when will the government initiate this project ? 
perhaps the government could look at a means of putting helicopters on board the ships more quickly . 
after all , we know the requirement for the role of the replacement , and we know that the replacement was ready to be initiated by the government in 1993 before the government cancelled the EH - 101 program . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the Honourable Senator Forrestall for his question and his obvious concern with respect to the operation of the Sea King helicopters . 
as I indicated to senators some days ago , the replacement for the Sea King helicopter remains a priority for the government and , indeed , remains at the top of the priority list of the current minister . 
i believe the current fleet of helicopters - the CH - 124 Sea Kings - was delivered to the Canadian forces in 1963 . 
the expectation was , and continues to be , that the Sea Kings will fly until the year 2005 . 
there have been incidents . 
issues of maintenance have arisen . 
of the original 41 helicopters , I believe 30 are still in operation . 
in fact , it is felt that they can fulfil their role until a replacement is available . 
possibility of Transferring Accident Investigation to Transportation Safety Board 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators will realize it is now 1,825 days since this program was promised immediately . 
does the Leader of the Government in the Senate realize that we are asking young men and women in the Canadian Armed Forces to fly in an aircraft that is inherently unreliable ? 
they are tired . 
they are aged . 
maintaining them is costing us a fortune . 
it takes thirty - eight hours - more perhaps now - to keep one airborne for one hour . 
does the minister not realize that we are endangering the lives of Canadian Forces personnel ? 
would the minister examine the possibility of transferring accident investigation from the military to our national Transportation Safety Board , which would have grounded these helicopters years ago ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my honourable friend is quite right when he describes the abilities and capacity of our maintenance personnel in the Canadian Armed Forces , particularly those involved with the Sea King helicopters . 
he might agree with me when I say that they are among the most experienced maintenance people in the world with respect to this piece of equipment . 
i do not think the honourable senator is indicating that the military would send its members into a mission in a piece of equipment that was not deemed appropriate and ready to fulfil the mission . 
there have been and will continue to be , no doubt , challenges with respect to maintenance . 
as a piece of military equipment reaches the end of its useful life , the degree and number of those challenges increases . 
that has happened and will continue to happen . 
i would not take from that , though , that we would send people on a mission where their safety or lives were placed at risk . 
we should give the maintenance crews a great deal of credit for the job they do and will continue to do . 
i share the honourable senator ' s wish that these helicopters be replaced expeditiously , and I had the assurance of the minister as recently as a few days ago that it remains his top priority and that he will push ahead . 
i will extend to the minister the encouragement , not only of myself but also of the senator , that the matter be dealt with as quickly as possible . 
senator Forrestall : 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate did not respond to my question . 
the question is still hanging out there . 
let me add to it , and I hope he will respond . 
the second part of the question is whether the minister recognizes that the tasking for the ship - borne replacement program was carried out before the present Prime Minister cancelled the EH - 101 program . 
that two - year job has already been completed . 
can we get some assurances ? 
we have waited eight years and cannot deal with a further three - year gap , because this is critical . 
these helicopters are unreliable . 
they should be grounded . 
will the minister , as well , respond to the suggestion that perhaps this matter of the performance of this equipment should be monitored by the Transportation Safety Board and not the Canadian military ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator has raised two questions . 
the first question asks whether or not I can reassure him that the replacements will be in place prior to some date eight years hence . 
certainly the judgment I can make , based on my conversations with the minister , give me great confidence that in fact we will not be waiting eight years for the replacement of the Sea Kings . 
i wish to extend the confidence which I feel to the honourable senator , and indicate that I believe that we can be assured that the replacements will not take another eight years . 
the second question that the honourable senator raises is one with respect to investigations of incidents involving military equipment . 
frankly , it is not an area in which I have a great deal of expertise . 
i suspect , though , that the Armed Forces generally handle these matters on their own . 
that may not be the case , however , and the honourable senator may perhaps at some point have an opportunity to share his experience with me on that point . 
i cannot answer definitively at this stage in any event . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Leasing 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , my question is a supplementary to Senator Forrestall ' s questions . 
i happen to have flown aircraft in the air force and I still fly today . 
i say this in order to qualify what I am about to ask the minister . 
the point is that the government is asking these maintenance people to perform miracles . 
i started my military career at the maintenance level and progressed to aircrew . 
that is how I know that these maintenance people are excellent , however , they are not miracle workers . 
i read just recently that for every hour one of these Sea Kings flies requires 30 hours of maintenance . 
they have gone so far as - and I stand to be corrected on this - to have given aircrews the discretion of not flying if they do not feel comfortable with the aircraft . 
when you get to that level , the game is over . 
how could the minister possibly do that , as a member of cabinet ? 
i believe that if an accident takes place , the responsibility will lie squarely on the shoulders of the cabinet , and in particular , the Minister of National Defence and the Prime Minister of this country . 
i believe that there are solutions , such as the leasing of helicopters . 
there are mechanically sound helicopters all over the world which could perform this function safely . 
why are we not proceeding in that direction ? 
on the occasion I posed this question to the leader ' s predecessor , he said he had discussed it with the minister and that consideration was being given in this particular area . 
i have flown a four - seater aircraft accompanied by one of our senators . 
i was particularly conscious of the safety aspect . 
even if the senator had been a Liberal , I would be just as conscious of safety . 
i am sure that when I was in the air force I must have flown many Liberals , or flown with them , and I was just as conscious of their safety . 
honourable senators , I urge the minister to act on the possibility of leasing , and I ask for a response in that regard . 
as I say , there are millions of helicopters . 
in North America alone there are thousands of them at least . 
why are we not leasing this ? 
why are we doing this to our military ? 
we are doing things to our military , in various other areas , that are disgraceful . 
why are we doing this to aircrew who are working to save lives and jeopardizing their own lives in the process ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the honourable senator makes a number of points and I will not try to follow all of the comments . 
specifically with respect to the Sea King helicopter , the honourable senator has indicated that my predecessor had discussions at some point with the minister with respect to the issue of leasing . 
i have not . 
however , I certainly will undertake to have a similar type of discussion with the minister , and then perhaps I can relay more specific information . 
honourable senators , before sitting down , I should like to say that the Canadian Armed Forces , be they operating Sea King helicopters or any other equipment , do a remarkable job . 
they have been supported by government . 
i believe that the people in charge of maintaining the Sea King helicopters not only do a remarkable job , but that at no time would they ever permit an aircraft to be used if they felt there was any threat to life and limb . 
i believe that those people maintaining the Sea King helicopters do a magnificent job under admittedly difficult circumstances , especially when you consider that this is an old piece of equipment . 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
possible Transitional Fund for Farmers Wishing to Change Careers 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
however , before I bring the question forward , I wish to again express my appreciation and the appreciation of the house for having allowed the discussion that we had yesterday on the farm crisis in Canada . 
i thank all honourable senators for their input in the debate . 
i understand that there will be a statement today in the House of Commons by the Minister of Agriculture pertaining to additional assistance for the AIDA program . 
i am somewhat concerned , though , about a report in The Globe and Mail today , that says : 
the minister is also believed to be considering a transitional fund for farmers who decide to leave the land and switch careers . 
i am concerned about that because I know of no farm organization and no farmers who have asked for such a program . 
that is an indication to me that maybe we are trying , as a government , to push farmers out of farming . 
that is not the purpose of representations at all . 
the purpose arising from our concern is to keep the farmers on the land , not to encourage them to leave the land . 
as the farmers leave the land in rural Saskatchewan , Manitoba , and Alberta , it destroys the very fabric of that part of the nation . 
we need every farmer and farm family where they are in order to support the elevator system , the education system and the health system in those communities . 
i am concerned , therefore , if this is truly what the government is proposing . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us if , in fact , the government and the Minister of Agriculture are proposing such a program ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for the question . 
with regard to the first part of the question , I am not aware of any such discussion or any such proposal from any contact or conversations I have had with the minister . 
therefore , I am unable to respond as to whether the suggestion has been proposed by another organization . 
however , as I walked into the Senate this afternoon , I was handed a news release issued by the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food which lays out the details of the proposal made by the minister . 
i asked my staff to prepare a bilingual copy of the announcement , in order that it would be available for all senators to read . 
i have not yet received that copy , however , I anticipate receiving it shortly . 
if it is the desire of honourable senators , I will supply senators with copies of that announcement . 
there is nothing in the announcement that refers to a buy - out program or anything of that nature . 
this is in addition to annual federal farm payments of $ 600 million . 
as well , other changes in administration of the program are being contemplated . 
in any event , it is anticipated that the provincial premiers who expressed such concern when they recently visited Ottawa will join the federal government in making the AIDA program that much more available . 
i presume that the provinces will continue to maintain the 60 - 40 cost sharing arrangement under the existing program and taking into account that additional $ 170 million . 
assuming that that is the case , another significant amount of money will be added to the fund . 
request for Program to Keep Farmers on the Land 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question with regard to keeping farmers on the land . 
today , only 2.5 per cent of our country ' s population are left in agriculture . 
therefore , it is very important to keep them there . 
in the U.S. , President Clinton has said that he had decided to sign the measure because farmers are facing a true emergency and cannot wait . 
that was in reference to the $ 8.7 billion that was allocated to farmers in that country . 
the president of the farmers ' national union said that this infusion of assistance may mean the difference between farmers quitting and staying in business . 
the important thing is to keep farmers on the land . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate communicate that to the cabinet ? 
we were pleased to hear that some measures have been taken to infuse more capital into the situation . 
i do not think that is nearly enough given the extreme circumstances we face . 
however , would the leader give us the assurance that he will press the government to bring in a program to keep farmers on the land , as opposed to helping them off the land ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have no difficulty in indicating that everything reasonably possible should be done to keep farmers on the land , contributing to Canadian life and society as they have over the years . 
let me paraphrase one portion of the release that just recently came into my hands . 
the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food said , " We will be asking the provinces to join us under AIDA , in covering 70 per cent of the producers ' negative margins or undertaking equivalent measures . " 
the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food also indicates that " We will continue to work with the provinces and industry to find ways to help farmers , particularly those in the most difficulty . " 
this statement clearly indicates that this is a federal commitment , backed up with a significant amount of money , to aid those in most difficulty and in most danger of having to leave the land . 
i expect this measure will have some of the effect that the honourable senator wishes . 
some credit should be given to the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food because he did not await a negotiated process with the provinces . 
the minister and the federal government in putting this money immediately into the program took action in a very direct and responsive way . 
the assumption is that the provinces will also comply and join with the federal government in contributing to enlarge the AIDA program . 
however , the federal government and the minister did not want to stretch out the process for a week , two weeks , 10 days , or a month looking for some sort of written guarantees to that effect . 
the minister moved immediately .. 
this money is an improvement over the way the AIDA program operated previously . 
it will reach the farmers who are most in need and most in danger of leaving the land . 
agricultural Income Disaster Assistance Program - Allocation of More Funds - Request for Clarification on Minister ' s Statement 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , is the leader suggesting that the new money will go out before the old money is paid out ? 
is that what he is suggesting when he says that it will go faster ? 
farmers have not received yet the old money that is under the AIDA program , and now it is being suggested that the new money will be going out faster . 
i wonder if the Leader of Government would take the message back that for the new money we do not really require another 47 - page application form . 
we are fed up with the old one , so we would like something simpler than that . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , there has been a recognition by the government that the funds in the AIDA program did not get out to the people in need as quickly as they should have . 
i listened to Senator Carstairs ' excellent speech yesterday in this chamber . 
she clearly and quite candidly outlined the difficulties in the program . 
the money did not get to the farmers in need as quickly as the federal government and all the other parties to the AIDA agreement had intended . 
it did not get to the farmers as quickly as the parties who designed the program had intended .. 
this new money will not operate under a different set of rules . 
it will go into the pot . 
however , along with the announcement of this money , the minister has also announced that some changes will be made to the program which will result in the money passing through the program and ending up in the farmers ' hands much more quickly . 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , the problem with the last program was that if a farmer had an average of three years and got hailed out in one year or dried out in one or two , there was no way that 70 per cent of that three - year average would work . 
could the minister convey to the members of cabinet the importance of getting to the farmers who are most in need ? 
if they were hailed out or dried out , there is no way that the negative average of 70 per cent of two bad years meant anything . 
those are the people who got burned the worst ; the ones that needed it the most . 
if that program is to work , some type of change is required so that the hurting will be healed . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , that may have been addressed . 
let me paraphrase again from the release . 
i do not know if that addresses the specific problem the honourable senator raises , but it seems to indicate some assistance for the type of situation he brought to our attention . 
honourable senators , with leave , I should like to table the news release . 
i just received a bilingual copy , and I would ask that additional copies be made and distributed to any honourable senators who may be interested . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
we will make copies and distribute them as soon as they are ready . 
request for Financial Support for Alfalfa Dehydrators 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate take to the cabinet table the problem of alfalfa dehydrators in Western Canada who contract for their crops with farmers ? 
they are in a squeeze because they promised the farmers X dollars per tonne and can only sell at X - minus dollars per tonne . 
they are mostly small companies , sometimes co - ops . 
a couple of dozen in Western Canada are likely to go under because the Minister of Agriculture ruled that they are corporations , in effect , and cannot qualify for AIDA . 
yet , if they go under , a number of farmers will not be able to sell alfalfa any longer . 
even though they are very small businesses , they do provide jobs . 
since the AIDA program cannot help in this regard , I hope the Leader of the Government will take their problem to the cabinet table and find out if there is some other way to get them over the next two or three years and to keep those alfalfa plants open . 
after all , farmers need them badly . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate my honourable friend ' s comments on that subject . 
i will , with pleasure , take his concerns to the cabinet table and specifically to the minister responsible . 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Effect on Local Economy 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , my question is on a slightly different subject . 
it concerns the recent Supreme Court decision in the Marshall case . 
regardless of how one may view the decision , most people agree that it will have a profound impact on the lives of both natives and non - natives in Atlantic Canada , and the adjustments will have ramifications for the economy and finances for the whole of Canada . 
i would cite the possible effect on Sable Island gas , on timber and mineral rights , and so on . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate what measures and contingency plans are being undertaken to deal with the economic adjustments and the fallout from the Supreme Court decision ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the first and most immediate fallout from the Marshall decision , as the honourable senator well knows , has occurred in the Atlantic Canada fishery . 
as a priority , the Minister of Fisheries and the government have attempted to address that situation as quickly as possible in the hope of bringing calm to both parties and encouraging meaningful discussion towards what ultimately will have to be a long - term solution to a situation that has pretty serious short - term implications . 
some of the scenes we witnessed made us all uncomfortable , I am sure . 
that short - term negotiating process seems to have taken hold . 
a sense of calm has been restored , and we are very hopeful that those discussions will proceed . 
it cannot be paid solely by fishermen in Atlantic Canada , any more than it can be paid by office workers in Vancouver . 
an accommodation must be made by the entire country in recognition of these aboriginal rights as defined by the Supreme Court . 
i anticipate a long - term process . 
however , in areas where an immediate resolution must be obtained , especially in the Atlantic fishery , I think good work has taken place and I hope it will continue . 
possibility of Transitional Fund for Fishers Wishing to Change Careers 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I could not help but take note earlier of the question asked by Senator Sparrow regarding the adjustment programs that were contemplated or were rumoured to be contemplated for the agricultural sector . 
similar indications have come from various sources that money has been set aside for an adjustment program - I will not suggest the word " buyout " . 
the figure I have heard is $ 500 million - I believe I counted eight zeros at the end of the five - to accommodate the agricultural sector alone . 
that is a huge sum . 
is the same approach being contemplated for fisheries - in other words , buying out certain people in the fishery sector and other sectors , which will add more zeros to the figure - or is this merely a rumour that is floating around ? 
i might remind the minister that there is a great deal of uncertainty in many communities . 
we are entering the winter fishery now , which is a much - reduced fishery . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I cannot confirm any speculative numbers . 
i would be very surprised if numbers have been seriously discussed at this point . 
one reason is that the full extent of the Marshall decision - its application , width and breadth - is unknown at this time . 
somewhere in the government someone might be writing a paper on all sorts of scenarios , but I do not think any numbers have been seriously considered at this stage . 
a possible buyout may arise at some point . 
by the way , honourable senators , I cannot confirm - quite the contrary - any such rumours with respect to the farming community . 
i am not aware of any plan to buy out farmers . 
i do not want to mislead the Senate with respect to that question . 
however , the situation with respect to the fishery is a bit different . 
a buyout program is in effect now . 
as a matter of fact , an aboriginal buyout program has purchased licences in certain areas of the fishery and turned them over to the aboriginal community . 
that program was in existence before the Marshall decision and is almost guaranteed to continue in some form . 
the point I wish to make to the honourable senator again is that the situation is a challenge not just for the fishermen in New Brunswick or Nova Scotia ; it is a challenge for all of Canada . 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to ask the Table to call , as the first item of business , Order No. 2 under the heading of " Bills " , namely , the second reading of Bill C - 6 . 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I am pleased to have the opportunity to address the Senate regarding Bill C - 6 , whose short title is the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act . 
with the advent of the new information economy , Canadians are finding new ways of connecting to each other , to markets , to governments and to the world . 
all Canadians have a stake in the new knowledge - based economy which is bringing with it changes that profoundly affect all our lives . 
canada ' s success in the 21 st century will depend on the ability of all Canadians to participate and succeed in the global , knowledge - based economy . 
to ensure that participation , we must move quickly to provide Canadians with the necessary access , skills and confidence that this new technology will not erode the privacy they now have and enjoy with respect to the way in which their personal information is handled . 
bill C - 6 , the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act , is a significant step toward achieving these goals . 
honourable senators , Bill C - 6 is the product of informed review by many experts in the field of data protection and electronic commerce , of widespread public consultations , and of extensive examination in the other place . 
it will also be subjected to extensive hearings by a standing committee of the Senate . 
the bill addresses three broad issues to help Canadians fully exploit the true potential of the Internet as the medium of information and commerce . 
the legislation will : first , create an electronic alternative for doing business with the federal government ; second , provide a legal basis for electronic records and secure electronic signatures ; and , third , protect the personal information of Canadians in their dealings with private sector organizations . 
already , the federal government has pioneered the use of the Internet as a means to improve service to Canadians , increase efficiency and lower costs . 
many of the federal government ' s transactions with the public , from the filing of income tax returns to the provision of information on any number of subjects , can now take place electronically at great speed and at much lower cost than the old paper way of doing these things . 
however , much more can be done if we update federal statutes and regulations to capture the opportunities presented by the Internet . 
many existing statutes and regulations often specify that information must be given in writing or certain documents must be signed . 
such references can and , historically , have been interpreted as restricting transactions to paper only and as precluding electronic alternatives . 
bill C - 6 allows us to make existing statutes and regulations compatible with the new electronic environment . 
it will enable us to provide an electronic alternative to the transmission of information on paper . 
parts 2 to 5 of Bill C - 6 will eliminate the so - called " paper bias " in our current federal laws and regulations by making them essentially media neutral . 
that is to say , by making electronic transmission and information equal in quality in terms of the statutes and regulations with paper documents . 
bill C - 6 will put electronic transactions governed by federal laws on the same footing as paper ones . 
it will assure business and citizens that electronic documents and signatures have legal standing . 
bill C - 6 will not replace or eliminate communications through the written word . 
instead , it will make the electronic transmission of information through computers an option that is realistic , practical and , above all , legally sound . 
moreover , we are enabling the federal government to accommodate a way to do business that is increasingly popular with Canadians , namely , doing business electronically over the Internet . 
Canadians increasingly want to do business electronically , not just with their governments but with the private sector as well . 
there is a lot of evidence to support that , both from public opinion polling information and from looking at the number of transactions that are now being conducted over the Internet and looking at the rate of growth of those transactions . 
the increasing pervasiveness of networks and the increasing speed with which the associated technology advances means companies are collecting more information from more sources , moving it faster and further and combining it more ingeniously than ever before . 
this has resulted in the treatment of personal information as a commodity . 
personal information is now bought , sold , and traded . 
personal information now has commercial value in and of itself . 
in order for electronic commerce to flourish in Canada , consumers need to feel confident about how their personal information is gathered , stored and used . 
Canadians are concerned that their personal privacy is being eroded by the shift from paper to electronic transactions and information storage , and the storage of accumulated files of information about each of us . 
Canadians want government to work with business to do something about the problem . 
in July 1998 , an Angus Read poll showed that 88 per cent of Canadians said they found it " unacceptable " for companies and organizations to sell , trade or share lists containing personal information with other organizations . 
the business community has recognized these concerns in the past by adopting a voluntary privacy code developed by the Canadian Standards Association . 
although the business community ' s efforts and commitment to this code has been impressive , Canadians need assurance that they can be confident about privacy when doing business . 
bill C - 6 will give Canadians the privacy protection they desire by legislating a privacy code that is enforceable and mandatory . 
right now , personal information is crossing all boundaries : provincial , territorial , and national . 
however , because of the business orientation and focus of Bill C - 6 , the federal government is confident that the bill is a legitimate exercise of its authority to legislate in respect of trade and commerce in Canada . 
nevertheless , honourable senators , the committee to which this bill is referred will hear expert witnesses who will argue both sides both sides of this constitutional question . 
honourable senators , there is clearly a need to legislate on a national basis . 
provinces acting alone and even together cannot pass laws that can effectively protect information crossing interprovincial and international boundaries . 
a company in British Columbia collecting information from customers in Manitoba may disclose it to another company in New Brunswick or New York . 
canada , therefore , clearly needs a national law to protect personal data in such circumstances - a law that is harmonized with the provinces and territories playing their part in their area of jurisdiction . 
honourable senators , Bill C - 6 will apply to all industry sectors , regardless of the size of business . 
this includes the healthcare sector . 
it will provide protection for personal health information it has collected , used and disclosed in the course of commercial activities . 
to reconcile data protection rules across jurisdictions , the government encourages the provinces and territories to protect citizens ' data in their area of competence and to harmonize not only with the federal privacy legislation but also with each other . 
part 1 of Bill C - 6 addresses the need to safeguard personal data by establishing the right to the protection of personal information . 
it sets clear rules for how that information will be collected , used and disclosed in the course of commercial activities . 
the CSA Standard principles address the way in which organizations should collect , use , disclose and protect personal information . 
they call for businesses to identify the purpose for which information is collected , to obtain the individual ' s consent regarding collection , to use and disclose personal information , and to provide measures allowing for access to records and organizational accountability . 
compliance with Part 1 of the legislation will be overseen by the Privacy Commissioner of Canada . 
the Privacy Commissioner will investigate and mediate disputes and investigate complaints . 
indeed , one of the issues I believe the committee will want to discuss will be the rules necessary to ensure that the Privacy Commissioner , in carrying out his investigative and mediation roles , falls within the guidelines set out in various Supreme Court of Canada decisions , including the decision on the search - and - seizure powers of the old Combines Investigation Act in relation to The Edmonton Journal case . 
that is clearly an issue the committee will want to examine . 
unresolved disputes can be taken up under this act by going to the Federal Court for final resolution . 
the Privacy Commissioner is also given a strong public education mandate to help businesses meet the requirements of the bill . 
at the present time in Canada , the protection of personal information can best be described as sporadic and uneven . 
most industries are not subject to any rules at all concerning the collection , use and disclosure of personal information . 
the rest are covered by what the Privacy Commissioner of Canada has called a " patchwork " of laws regulations and codes . 
only the province of Quebec has broad legislation governing the use of private information by the private sector . 
Canadian businesses are also calling for legislation that would set a single national standard of rules to ensure a level playing field across the country and , indeed , across various types of businesses . 
Canadian businesses realize that privacy makes good business sense . 
they understand that flexible but effective legislation will help customers accept electronic ways of doing business and thus increase the volume of business . 
canada needs new legislation to protect privacy . 
such legislation must strike a balance between the rights of individuals to have control over their personal information . 
consumers need access to avenues for effective redress in cases where they think their personal information is being misused . 
on the other hand , legislation must address the needs of industry to collect and use personal information as a vital component of success in the information economy . 
i believe , honourable senators , that the legislation before us , Bill C - 6 , strikes an appropriate balance . 
bill C - 6 will help build consumer trust while , at the same time , putting in place a set of rules that gives the business community the certainty it needs to take full advantage of the potential of electronic commerce and thus to help ensure that Canada is a world leader in electronic commerce and global information . 
i look forward to participating in the analysis of this bill at the committee stage . 
i urge all honourable senators to join in that analysis and to send Bill C - 6 as quickly as possible to committee . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I intend to offer some extended comments on this bill , after which I will propose the adjournment of the debate . 
several people and organizations have expressed certain concerns about this legislation . 
i am trying to arrange to meet with them early next week if possible . 
i have in mind , in particular , people from the health care sector . 
i do not want to conclude my remarks on second reading until I have had an opportunity to hear their comments . 
after the adjournment of the debate , therefore , I would propose to conclude my remarks when we return here on the Tuesday following the Armistice Day break . 
i should also signal to honourable senators that at least one other colleague on this side , namely Senator Oliver , intends to participate in this debate at second reading . 
it represents a forced marriage of two bills on two rather different , almost unrelated subjects . 
the Minister of Justice herself , when she appeared before the House of Commons committee , acknowledged and government officials confirmed that this bill started out as two bills . 
somewhere in the cabinet process , someone came along with a pair of scissors and a pot of paste and decided to paste the two bills together and make them one . 
part 1 of this bill would protect personal information collected in the course of commercial activity . 
parts 2 to 5 of the bill would validate electronic documents and processes under the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act , the Statute Revision Act , et cetera . 
it would facilitate electronic commerce with the Government of Canada . 
part 1 and Parts 2 to 5 of the bill do not really lend themselves to a single principle or to a single theme . 
this bill is really an omnibus bill . 
it comes from the Honourable Herb Gray who was speaking then as a member of the opposition during the debate on free trade in the House of Commons in 1988 . 
he said : 
the essential defence of an omnibus procedure is that the Bill in question , although it may seek to create or amend many disparate statutes , in effect has one basic principle or purpose which ties together all the proposed enactments and thereby renders the Bill intelligible for parliamentary purposes . 
this bill does not , as they say , " cut it " in light of that definition . 
that definition is very concise . 
it has been cited by succeeding Speakers in the House of Commons as an excellent definition of what an omnibus bill should be . 
bill C - 6 is not a proper omnibus bill . 
it covers two different themes , two different principles . 
in all charity and with some understanding and affection for the drafters ' problems , this attempt to invent a single principle or a single theme where none exists is not very impressive . 
it is quite disingenuous . 
it is fancy legislative and verbal footwork and gymnastics . 
the first part of this bill , the privacy part of it , deals with private information however collected , whether by electronic or any other means . 
the long title , trying to make a single principle or a single theme of this bill - I say again with some charity - is a lovely piece of nonsense that the drafters have concocted . 
senator Stewart a few years ago accused me of having the mind of a mandarin . 
i do not think that is true . 
if it were even partially true , I would certainly defer to Senator Kirby , because I would not be even in the same league with him in that respect . 
however , I think I have had sufficient experience to understand something of the mandarin and , indeed , the political mind . 
somewhere along the line , someone came in and said , " We only have so much parliamentary time at our disposal ; let ' s slap these two bills together . " 
out came , electronically , of course , the scissors and paste . 
the bill was slapped together in that fashion . 
it is the same cause , the same consideration - namely , the convenience of the executive to which the prerogatives of Parliament , for the past 30 years , have time and time again been subordinated and which , in my humble opinion , have made a virtual shell out of the House of Commons . 
it is much to be regretted . 
i am of two minds whether we on this side should pursue this issue . 
one part of me says , " We really must take a stand on matters of this kind as a question of principle . " 
the other says , " Well , in the other place , so much time has gone by that they have forgotten even what their prerogatives are , and if they don ' t care , why should we ? " 
however , I will take the occasion to consult with my colleagues to see whether at some later stage in the debate we may want to pursue this matter . 
there is plenty of precedent , as Senator Graham will recall , for the Senate ' s splitting a bill . 
when I was sitting opposite and was the minister in charge of ACOA , I brought in a bill to create that agency and at the same time to create certain other agencies , including the Enterprise Cape Breton Corporation . 
those were provisions that I thought hung well together , and which did hang together very well in a single theme , but my friend Senator Graham and his then leader Senator MacEachen had some policy problems with the bill . 
a message was sent back to the House of Commons telling the House of Commons that we had split the bill and that it was now two bills , and so on and so forth . 
i wished to flag that issue , honourable senators , if only for the record , because it is a matter of principle . 
this bill was Bill C - 54 in the first session of the present Parliament . 
it died when that session was prorogued , and it was revived in the new session at the report stage . 
what I have to say about Bill C - 6 and evidence from committees and so forth refers largely to the proceedings on Bill C - 54 , but the bills are identical . 
as far as I have been able to gather , there have been no principled objections raised to Parts 2 to 5 , the electronic commerce parts of this bill . 
most of the controversy , if I might call it that , relates to Part 1 , the so - called privacy provisions . 
this may be one of the problems with pasting together two bills in one . 
it may well be that insufficient attention has been paid by witnesses and others interested , and by legislators in the other place , to Parts 2 to 5 . Goodness knows they are very important . 
they have , among other things , to do with the judicial system - the courts and the law and the taking of affidavits and all of that kind of thing . 
it may be , however , that , because Part 1 is more controversial , Parts 2 to 5 have been given only a cursory examination , or an inadequate examination , by both the interested public and the legislators . 
as I say , this may well be one of the problems with pasting together two bills as one . 
with regard to Part 1 , and most of my remarks today relate to that part of the bill , let me express my strong bias . 
i strongly believe in the protection of privacy . 
i believe that privacy is inherent to the dignity of the individual . 
we already have a Privacy Act in this country that protects individuals from undue invasion of their privacy by the federal government and its agencies . 
i think that act works pretty well . 
so far as I know , it has been pretty effective . 
we have not had until now legislation to protect the privacy of personal information collected in the commercial sphere . 
i say " bravo " to the government for having brought this initiative in now . 
it is overdue , and I support the idea entirely and without reservation . 
i hope our support - I think I can speak on behalf of colleagues on this side - for this legislative initiative will be borne in mind and that anything that I say that may be construed as a criticism of this bill will be considered in light of our support for privacy and for legislation to protect the privacy of information collected for commercial purposes . 
in that connection , I do not find as offensive as some apparently do the fact that this bill will give certain powers to the Privacy Commissioner . 
i do not think these are excessive . 
i think that an individual ' s personal privacy is so important that Parliament ought to go the extra mile , if we must , to protect it . 
i note in passing that some people have offered criticism of the structure of the bill . 
schedule I itself has a mixture of the mandatory - in other words , what " must " be done and what " shall " be done - with the advisory - what " may " be done , what " can " be done , and what " should " be done . 
lawyers who have examined this bill more carefully and written briefs on it have said that this will present a very considerable difficulty and that what ought to have been done , and what still ought to be done , is that the mandatory provisions set out in Schedule I ought to be put four - square into the law and the " mays " , " cans " and " shoulds " ought to be left separate in the schedule . 
i raise that as something the committee should be ready to consider . 
if the bill can be improved in that respect , so much the better . 
pleas have been made in the House of Commons for blanket exemption from this bill . 
i am not very sympathetic to those pleas at all . 
it may be , however , that in certain fields , and the health - care field comes to mind , a strong case can be made for special treatment under legislation of this kind , and I will come to that eventually . 
as I said , I am not very sympathetic to pleas for exemption . 
indeed , I question some of the exemptions in the bill as it now stands . 
in particular , may I draw your attention , honourable senators , to Part 1 , clause 4 ( 2 ) ( c ) , an exemption that is granted to : 
any organization in respect of personal information that the organization collects , uses or discloses for journalistic , artistic or literary purposes and does not collect , use or disclose for any other purpose . 
i shall first address artistic or literary purposes . 
what are they ? 
does this not strike you as a rather broad definition ? 
i think it is . 
can it be defined more closely ? 
i think we should try . 
when the matter was discussed at the House of Commons committee , there was a presentation that implied that without this exemption docu - dramas might run afoul of the law . 
you know what docu - drams are , honourable senators . 
they are a mixture of fact and fiction . 
they are interesting and enjoyable to watch , but perhaps they should come under a law such as this . 
perhaps they should not be given a routine exemption . 
i think the matter is worth further consideration . 
as for exempting information on individuals that is collected for journalistic purposes , the explanation of why this exemption is included is that , if we do not include the exemption , should this bill become law it would be subject to a likely successful challenge under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms based on the right to self - expression , the freedom of the press . 
that is probably true . 
however , it raises a question in my mind as to why we do not have in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms the protection of a right to privacy that would put that right on at least an equal basis with the rights that appertain to a free press . 
i think it is regrettable that our Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not contain such a protection . 
allow me to give honourable senators some historical information . 
as long ago as 1979 , the Trudeau government , through its then Minister of Justice , Mr. Jean Chr é tien , made a commitment in a constitutional policy statement that the right to privacy would be one of those rights that the federal government proposed to enshrine in any future charter of rights and freedoms . 
when the opportunity came to do so during the lead - up to the 1982 Constitution , that same government , in a different incarnation post - 1980 , ducked . 
Mr. Chr é tien was again the Minister of Justice . 
honourable senators will recall that there was a joint committee of the Senate and the House of Commons that reviewed the patriation package and , in particular , the draft charter of rights and freedoms . 
the co - chairmen were Senator Harry Hays , the father of our present colleague , and Serge Joyal , then a member of the House of Commons . 
the Conservatives and the NDP members on that committee took the initiative of proposing that a right to privacy be entrenched in the Charter . 
senator Kirby will remember that . 
Mr. Chr é tien argued against it . 
his argument was that the concept of privacy was altogether too vague . 
further , he opined that privacy would receive adequate protection because of section 7 , relating to security of the person , and section 8 , relating to unreasonable search and seizure , in the draft charter . 
in the event , the Tory - NDP initiative was defeated , I think most regrettably . 
in the 1992 negotiations that led to the Charlottetown accord , the present Privacy Commissioner , Mr. Bruce Phillips , intervened and argued very cogently that the right to privacy be included , that the Charter be opened to allow an amendment to incorporate the right to privacy . 
the first ministers , in their wisdom , did not do so . 
it is sometimes said that we are protected by the laws of libel and slander . 
people more learned in the law than I would have to analyze that , but all that says to me is that the media can print or broadcast any information they like about any individual , so long as it is true . 
by the way , honourable senators , there was a lengthy article in The Globe and Mail this morning dealing with attempts made by the history industry to overturn the commitment that Sir Wilfrid Laurier had written into the law to protect census data . 
i know that Senator Milne has a view about this . 
many historians wish to get their paws on personal data that was given in confidence to the census takers since , I believe , 1906 . 
the historians are arguing vigorously in favour of removing that restriction . 
Mr. Phillips , the Privacy Commissioner , is arguing just as vigorously against removing that restriction . 
let me say that I agree with Mr. Phillips . 
if my grandfather or great grandfather gave personal information to the census taker on the basis of the commitment made by Sir Wilfrid Laurier , I believe that that should be respected . 
inevitably , in Canada , a bill of this kind raises constitutional issues , as my honourable friend has pointed out ; constitutional issues in the classic sense of division of powers questions , as well as federal - provincial issues of a more administrative nature . 
on the constitutional issue , the opinions that were expressed are along the whole range , from one end that this is a proper use of the federal commerce power , to the other extreme , which is that the bill is completely ultra vires the federal Parliament . 
my layman ' s opinion , for what it is worth , which is not much , is in agreement with that expressed by Senator Kirby . 
i believe this bill is a proper and legitimate use of the federal commerce power and Senator Kirby set out cogently , as only a layman can , some of the reasons why this is so . 
i also add that I do not believe the federal government should be shy , as governments have been in the past , to invoke the commerce power . 
it is there for a purpose . 
the Canadian Bar Association was its usual unhelpful self on this issue when they appeared before the House of Commons committee . 
they noted the fact that some jurists said that it was ultra vires and some jurists said that it was completely within our power , and some jurists said something in between , and the Canadian Bar Association concluded that all of these positions have some constitutional justification . 
the Canadian Bar Association , having copped out , I feel the committee should , as Senator Kirby has suggested , canvass this issue . 
we must take it seriously . 
we should hear from experts . 
i trust we will be able to engage those members of the Senate who have more constitutional expertise and experience than I have . 
they may even change Senator Kirby ' s and my minds about it , although it is unlikely . 
Quebec is the only province that does protect the privacy of information that is collected for commercial purposes . 
Quebecers have a double protection in that there is aa chapter in the Quebec Civil Code that protects privacy of information collected for commercial purposes , and also they have a Privacy Act that does the same thing . 
senator Kirby did not refer to this ; therefore , I will . 
for the first three years after Royal Assent , after proclamation , this law will apply only to commercial activity that is in the federal jurisdiction and to interprovincial commerce . 
only after three years will it apply to commercial activity that is totally within a provincial border and only if that province has not passed equivalent legislation . 
one wonders why the government goes through those hoops , given the robust assertion of their commercial power ; however , I believe it has to do with the fact that Quebec already has legislation and Alberta is said to have some legislation in the pipe . 
also , I may say that the provincial ministers of justice all asked to have this bill withdrawn . 
as I said , I feel that is going a bit far . 
in addition to the constitutional issue , there is the problem that has been raised of some ambiguity and confusion in those provinces that do legislate , as Quebec has done . 
we will then have the federal law applying to the federal jurisdiction and to interprovincial commerce , and the provincial law applying to commercial activity solely within the borders of that province . 
it may be more difficult to make a distinction between those various activities than it appears . 
i mean , what is interprovincial , what is intraprovincial ? 
what legislation will apply , federal or provincial ? 
there may be some administrative difficulty , some ambiguity and confusion . 
administrative problems can always be overcome . 
senator Kirby , who was a mandarin , would surely support that confident assertion ; however , the provincial ministers , as I said , have asked that the bill be withdrawn and I believe they should be heard , with a view to trying to reassure them or , if possible , to address their concerns . 
senator Kirby has referred to the health care sector . 
Mr. Manley , the Minister of Industry , who had carriage of this bill in the other place , believes that he has met the concerns that were expressed by virtue of an amendment that he presented on October 15 , I believe it was . 
my information is that those in the health - care sector who have expressed such concerns are not at all satisfied that their concerns have been met . 
the Canadian Dental Association have taken quite a hard line . 
doctors and hospitals perhaps somewhat less so ; however , they have all submitted briefs and we will need to hear from them when this bill goes to committee . 
the Canadian Health Care Association is especially concerned about this . 
the doctor - patient relationship is not " commercial " under the definition of this bill ; however , there are pharmacies and other health care providers that may or may not be commercial . 
the Canadian Health Care Association has received a legal opinion which is quite detailed and quite , I would say , devastating in its analysis of this bill . 
that opinion was prepared by a Montreal law firm and the man who wrote the covering letter was at some pains to point out that the lawyers who had worked on this were all people who had quite a track record as volunteers in important positions in hospitals and health care associations , et cetera . 
this legal opinion is must reading for anyone interested in this bill , in particular for anyone who intends to take part in the committee study of the bill . 
i would not agree with those who think that we should simply exempt health care and the health care sector and let it go at that . 
however , as I suggest , perhaps we should reconsider whether some special consideration and special treatment ought to be legislated in respect of that important sector . 
as I say , I intend , if I can , either personally or through my agents , to talk to them and hear what they have to say . 
i will return to that issue when I conclude my remarks on November 16 . 
with those few preliminary remarks , honourable senators , I propose the adjournment of the debate . 
on motion of Senator Murray , debate adjourned . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
it is an important bill because it deals with improving the safety of our children and other vulnerable people . 
however , at that time we were faced with quite a number of important pieces of legislation . 
therefore it is worth taking a few moments to review the main features and objectives of this bill . 
first and foremost , the changes will increase public security . 
they will make accessible , for screening purposes , the police record of sexual offenders who have been pardoned and are applying for positions involving a situation of trust . 
thus , a marker will be placed in the police record system when a sexual offender is pardoned and his record sealed . 
that means that when an agency caring for children wants to know the history of new employees , paid or unpaid , the history of a candidate who has committed a sexual offence and has been pardoned will not go unnoticed . 
few things are as disturbing as the thought that those who would pray on innocent children may take cover in an organization where those children should feel safe and protected . 
yet we know that on some occasions that has happened . 
this bill will give us one more tool to help prevent such incidents . 
in addition , the bill will do four things . 
first , it will clarify and strengthen the pardon system by providing for the automatic revocation of a pardon upon new convictions for hybrid offences , that is , an offence that can be prosecuted by indictment or as a summary offence . 
second , it will impose a waiting period of at least one year before an applicant who has been denied a pardon can apply again . 
third , it will require that appeals will be decided on the review of written material only unless the National Parole Board grants a hearing . 
fourth , it will specify more clearly that the effect of the pardon is to seal the record , not to destroy it or to erase the fact of conviction . 
while all of these measures are important in their own right , I should like to focus primarily on the question of pardoned sex offenders . 
the Criminal Records Act establishes a system to offer pardons to former offenders who have demonstrated a return to a law - abiding life . 
under that act , offenders can have their records sealed by obtaining a pardon from the National Parole Board . 
it is important to remember that the sealing does not expunge the conviction , nor does it erase the record . 
the conviction is , after all , a matter of historical fact . 
the criminal record can be unsealed on the authority of the Solicitor General when it is in the interests of the administration of justice or national security . 
honourable senators , pardons are not lightly given . 
they are granted only when an individual has demonstrated sustained crime - free conduct . 
in the case of summary conviction offences , this requires a three - year , crime - free period after completion of any and all sentences . 
bill C - 7 makes it clear that this includes the payment of fines . 
in the case of more serious indictable offences , the waiting period is five years . 
the National Parole Board must confirm that the applicant has been of good conduct during that entire period of time . 
before a pardon is granted , police are consulted in every community where pardoned applicants have lived during the past five years . 
it is important to know that the vast majority of pardoned offenders continue to comply with the law . 
in the past 28 years , nearly a quarter of a million pardons have been granted and , of this number , only a little more than 6,000 have been revoked because of a new offence . 
this represents a rate of success of over 97 per cent . 
bill C - 7 deals primarily with sex offenders who are a small segment of the larger pardon group . 
the Solicitor General ' s department has recently estimated that during the past 28 years , 4,200 sex offenders have received pardons . 
only 114 or 2.6 per cent of these offenders have had their pardon revoked for commission of another sex offence . 
these estimates demonstrate that , fortunately , only a small number of pardoned sex offenders continue to pose a risk of re - offending . 
however , no matter how small the number , it is important to reduce that risk to the lowest level possible . 
bill C - 7 will help us to do so . 
bill C - 7 is based on measures that have already been taken to protect children and other vulnerable groups . 
there was an important step forward in 1994 with the creation of the national screening system . 
this system relies on the Canadian Police Information Centre , or CPIC . 
through CPIC , organizations have access to information allowing them to eliminate child offenders from their lists of candidates for positions working with children . 
this system was established following broad consultations with child services organizations , school and child welfare officials , voluntary organizations such as Boys and Girls Clubs , Big Brother and Big Sister agencies , and Volunteer Canada , as well as the police and victim assistance organizations . 
these organizations said that checking criminal records was an important part of a thorough screening process . 
the national screening system is the result of cooperation between child welfare services , the police community , CPIC , and the Departments of the Solicitor General , Health and Justice . 
the screening system has been working well . 
bill C - 7 will improve the national screening system by correcting a potential weakness that has been identified . 
that weakness is the fact that a pardoned record of a sex offender could be overlooked during a routine screening check using the Canadian Police Information Centre , or CPIC , system . 
as it stands today , the Solicitor General has the authority to unseal and disclose a pardoned record for purposes consistent with the administration of justice , including screening . 
as such , records are removed from the CPIC system and kept separately in a sealed database , and they do not show up when a routine query of CPIC is made . 
this system of protection is exactly what is intended by the Criminal Records Act . 
for most purposes , these records should be invisible after a pardon has been granted . 
however , an exception is warranted when a person is applying for a position of trust and their record suggests that there would be an increased level of risk to a specifically vulnerable category of person . 
there was unanimous agreement on this point among federal , provincial and territorial ministers of justice and solicitors general when they met in October 1998 . 
a working group of senior officials examining ways to protect children have submitted 10 recommendations to their ministers . 
all 10 recommendations were adopted and are now being implemented . 
one proposal called for the records of pardoned sex offenders to be made available for consideration during screening of candidates for positions of trust . 
the federal Solicitor General , with the support of the Minister of Justice , undertook at the 1998 meeting to determine how best to do this , in consultation with provincial partners . 
bill C - 7 was the next logical step . 
as I noted earlier , it provides that when a criminal record that includes a sex offence is pardoned and removed from CPIC , a notation or " flag " will be left in its place . 
some may think that this measure runs counter to the fundamental intent of the Criminal Records Act , and that is a serious concern , of course . 
we want the pardon system to be a real system . 
however , this is a narrow and limited exception that is , in my view , warranted . 
ministers of Justice from all jurisdictions have supported this principle . 
not to take this step would risk incurring the potential consequences of the pardon helping a predatory sex offender work his way into a position of trust with children or with other vulnerable people . 
the legislation and CPIC policy will prohibit unauthorized use of this code . 
the consent of applicants must always be obtained and they may always withdraw their application if they do not wish to disclose their file to the organization doing the screening . 
in order to ensure that candidates are accurately identified , their fingerprints will be included with the request to remove the seals on the application for pardon . 
finally , the Solicitor General will have to agree that disclosure of the record is warranted . 
the sex offences that will be flagged on CPIC will be specified , as will the factors that are considered by the Solicitor General in making his decision whether or not to unseal a record . 
honourable senators , you may recall that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs had a very good discussion about the then Bill C - 69 during and following the appearance of the Solicitor General last June , and a further very productive session in September . 
i would like here to acknowledge the constructive contribution of Senator Nolin . 
the committee was particularly interested in the definitions of " children " and " vulnerable persons , " and in the precise identification of the list of sexual offences to which this bill relates . 
i am confident that the committee ' s excellent work will be of value to this chamber when the committee once again reviews this bill , now identified as Bill C - 7 . 
it is important to recognize that Bill C - 7 builds on measures already instituted by this government to improve the protection of children . 
they respond directly to the unanimous recommendation of provincial and territorial ministers . 
they received the unanimous support of all parties in the other place . 
they are consistent , I believe , with the concern we all share to do all that is possible to protect our children and vulnerable adults from predatory sexual offenders who would seek to harm them . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Nolin , debate adjourned . 
committee of Selection 
fourth Report Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the Fourth Report of the Committee of Selection ( composition of various committees ) , presented in the Senate on November 3 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Mercier ) 
hon. L é once Mercier : 
honourable senators , I move that this report be adopted . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
distinguished Canadians and Their Involvement with the United Kingdom 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned 
hon. Anne C . Cools rose pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 : 
that she will call the attention of the Senate : 
( a ) to persons of Canadian birth who sat as members of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom , including Ontario - born Edward Blake , Liberal Minister of Justice of Canada 1875 - 1877 also Leader of the Liberal Party of Canada 1880 - 1887 , and New Brunswick - born the Right Honourable Bonar Law , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 1922 - 1923 , and Ontario - born Sir Bryant Irvine , Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom 1976 - 1982 ; 
( b ) to persons of Canadian birth who sat as members of the House of Lords of the United Kingdom , including the Right Honourable R . B . Bennett , Prime Minster of Canada 1930 - 1935 , and Lord Beaverbrook , Cabinet Minister in the United Kingdom in 1918 and 1940 - 1942 ; 
( c ) to persons of British birth born in the United Kingdom or the Dominions and Colonies who have served in the Senate and the House of Commons of Canada including the Right Honourable John Turner , Prime Minister of Canada 1984 also Liberal Leader of the Opposition l 984 - 1990 and myself , a sitting black female Senator born in the British West Indies ; 
( d ) to persons of Canadian citizenship who were members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom including the Prime Ministers of Canada , the Supreme Court of Canada Chief Justices , and some Cabinet Ministers of Canada including the Leader of the Government in the Senate 1921 - 1930 and 1935 - 1942 the Right Honourable Senator Raoul Dandurand appointed to the United Kingdom Privy Council in 1941 ; 
( e ) to the 1919 Nickle Resolution , a motion of only the House of Commons of Canada for an address to His Majesty King George V and to Prime Minister R . B . Bennett ' s 1934 words in the House of Commons characterizing this Resolution , that : 
" that was as ineffective in law as it is possible for any group of words to be . 
it was not only ineffective , but I am sorry to say , it was an affront to the sovereign himself . 
every constitutional lawyer , or anyone who has taken the trouble to study this matter realizes that that is what was done . " ; 
( f ) to the words of Prime Minister R . B . Bennett in a 1934 letter to J . R . MacNicol , MP that : 
" so long as I remain a citizen of the British Empire and a loyal subject of the King , I do not propose to do otherwise than assume the prerogative rights of the Sovereign to recognize the services of his subjects . " ; 
( g ) to the many distinguished Canadians who have received honours since 1919 from the King or Queen of Canada including the knighting in 1934 of Sir Lyman Duff , Supreme Court of Canada Chief Justice , and in 1935 of Sir Ernest MacMillan , musician , and in 1986 of Sir Bryant Irvine , parliamentarian , and in 1994 of Sir Neil Shaw , industrialist , and in 1994 of Sir Conrad Swan , advisor to Prime Minister Lester Pearson on the National Flag of Canada ; 
( h ) to the many distinguished Canadians who have received 646 orders and distinctions from foreign non - British , non - Canadian sovereigns between 1919 and February 1929 ; 
( i ) to the legal and constitutional position of persons of Canadian birth and citizenship , in respect of their ability and disability for their membership in the United Kingdom House of Lords and House of Commons , particularly Canadians domiciled in the United Kingdom holding dual citizenship of Canada and of the United Kingdom ; 
( j ) to the legal and constitutional position of Canadians at home and abroad in respect of entitlement to receive honours and distinctions from their own Sovereign , Queen Elizabeth II of Canada , and to the position in respect of their entitlement to receive honours and distinctions from sovereigns other than their own , including from the sovereign of France the honour , the Ordre Royale de la L é gion d ' Honneur ; 
( k ) to those honours , distinctions , and awards that are not hereditary in character such as life peerages , knighthoods , military and chivalrous orders ; and 
( l ) to the recommendation by the United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II for the appointment to the House of Lords as a non - hereditary peer and lord of Mr. Conrad Black , a distinguished Canadian , publisher , entrepreneur and also the Honorary Colonel of the Governor General ' s Foot Guards of Canada ; 
honourable senators , I speak today to the unique historical and constitutional relationship between Canada and the United Kingdom , and to our shared Constitution and parliamentary systems , and to shared citizens and citizenship . 
not long ago , in my lifetime , British and Canadian citizenship were indistinguishable , though Canada ' s sovereignty was asserted under a peculiar dominion status . 
as a black person , born and raised to age 13 in Barbados , British West Indies , who moved to Canada , I share in this dual experience . 
years later , compelled by the comprehension that , as a black British anglophone in Quebec , I would never be a true Quebecer , I moved from Quebec to Ontario , a refugee from " pur laine . " 
i feel strongly that my heritage is being undermined and that I must assert and defend it . 
honourable senators , many in this country , including some cabinet ministers , advocate the dismantling of Canada ' s constitutional monarchy . 
i call this constitutional vandalism the deconstruction of Canada . 
they invoke a so - called popular democratic impulse against aristocracy , but their appeal to the democratic principle is shallow , hollow and very transparent . 
they present absolutism to the public as the ancient absolutism of kings , while deliberately ignoring the current absolutism of cabinets and courts in this modern era . 
these deconstructionists are intellectually and morally bankrupt . 
they mislead the public because Canada has never had an aristocracy or an aristocratic political structure . 
unlike the United Kingdom , aristocracy has never been a part of Canada ' s social , economic , military or political structure . 
canada , as a new world settlement , has never possessed the social conditions that caused the creation of aristocratic structures . 
canada never had the requisite condition for the aristocratic principle , being the hereditary principle known in England as the law of primogeniture , nor the aristocratic structure necessary for the protection of persons and property , being the protection of life and liberty provided by the aristocrat to his charges in return for their loyalty and service to him . 
in the United Kingdom , that political aristocratic structure gave way over time to ministerial responsible government , which Canada adopted very early in its history through the political party system . 
my political culture is that of a constitutional monarchy and British parliamentary institutions which gave the British Caribbean the oldest legislative assemblies in the common law world . 
these parliamentary institutions brought about the abolition of the slave trade in 1807 and the abolition of slavery itself in 1833 . 
the essential element of ministerial responsible government by the Queen in Parliament is the duty of Her Majesty ' s cabinet , under the confidence of Parliament , to find political solutions to human problems and conflicts in contrast to legal , judicial or military responses to those problems . 
politics is the answer to most problems . 
the greatest contribution of our British system is the art of politics . 
the making and recommending of political appointments and honours is politics . 
honourable Senators , Barbados is an old settlement whose legislative assembly was established in 1639 , the oldest legislative assembly outside the United Kingdom . 
this stands in stark contrast to that of French Haiti and Spanish Cuba , both republics and both non - British settlements . 
i feel a strong affection for the Queen in Parliament , and no affection or craving for republican institutions in Canada . 
i feel disaffection towards those who would transform Canada into a republic . 
i shall resist them , as is my sworn duty . 
Canadians are no less free or independent , and no less blessed in liberty than the citizens of any republic . 
that schools , political institutions and , especially , many politicians decline to uphold Canada ' s great constitutional heritage is a great tragedy . 
some have called it a lament for a nation . 
honourable senators , I turn now to the Queen ' s Royal Prerogative in respect of conferring recognitions , honours , distinctions , and titles . 
it is the ancient prerogative of sovereigns to extend honours to their own citizens . 
the converse is the entitlement of citizens - that is , Canadians - to receive honours from their own Queen . 
further , Canadians who reside in other countries are entitled to recognition by sovereigns of those countries . 
in cases of shared sovereigns and citizenships , those Canadians acquire additional entitlements . 
this fact is vital in today ' s era of globalization , which our government ' s foreign policy has supported vigorously . 
the desire of human beings , the desire of the human heart for support from fellow humans , for community acknowledgement as expressed in the sovereign ' s recognition , is a powerful , noble and important desire . 
all persons , distinguished in politics , industry , arts , community and military service , acts of bravery and every aspect of human and public service share in this universal desire of the human heart to be at one with fellow humans . 
this is the royal prerogative , the safeguarding and rewarding of this aspect of human nature . 
our sovereign has a distinct and separate relationship with each individual subject . 
every subject , by virtue of that individual relationship , is entitled to consideration for the Queen ' s justice , the Queen ' s mercy , the Queen ' s honour , the Queen ' s protection , and the Queen ' s peace . 
the lexicon reveals this . 
this entitlement flows from that special private relationship between Queen and individual subject . 
this relationship is a mystique and is deeply personal , because it is anchored in a belief and in an ideal called God , Queen and country . 
honourable senators , forgive me if I did not differentiate between " raw human ambition " , " greed " and the human need for approval by one ' s Queen , the Fount of Honour for their contributions to the common good . 
i meant honourable desires for honour . 
honourable senators , I turn now to the Nickle Resolution moved by William Folger Nickle , the Conservative member for Kingston , which was adopted in the House of Commons on May 22 , 1919 . 
this motion , a Commons only motion for an address to His Majesty George V , never sought concurrence of the Senate . 
the political reasons are clear and obvious . 
it would have faced certain defeat here , because senators would have comprehended it for what it was politically and constitutionally . 
further , it was an address to His Majesty , not to the Governor General of Canada , then the Duke of Devonshire . 
the address asked His Majesty to refrain from honouring Canadians and said in part : 
we , ... humbly approach Your Majesty , praying that Your Majesty may be graciously pleased : - 
to refrain hereafter from conferring any title of honour or titular distinction upon any of your subjects domiciled or ordinarily resident in Canada , ... 
to provide that appropriate action be taken by legislation or otherwise to ensure the extinction of an hereditary title of honour or titular distinction , and of a dignity or title as a peer of the realm , on the death of a person domiciled or ordinarily resident in Canada at present in enjoyment of an hereditary title ... 
honourable Senators , 10 years later , in 1929 , there was another debate in the Commons about this Nickle Resolution . 
Charles Cahan , a Conservative member moved , on February 12 , 1929 , that a special Commons committee be formed to reconsider Nickle , therein to investigate and report upon the advisability of qualifying , amending or rescinding the Nickle address as adopted on May 22 , 1919 . 
in that debate , as reported on page 78 of the Commons Debates of that date , Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King said : 
if we are to have no titles , titular distinctions or honours in Canada , let us hold to the principle and have none , let us abolish them altogether ; but if the sovereigns or heads of other countries are to be permitted to bestow honours on Canadians , for my part I think we owe it to our own sovereign to give him that prerogative before all others . 
the division , that vote on February 14 on Charles Cahan ' s motion , showed that Prime Minister King and then Conservative Leader of the Opposition , Richard B . Bennett , both voted " yea " with Charles Cahan . 
... it being the considered view of His Majesty ' s government in Canada that the motion , with respect to honours , adopted on the 22 nd day of May , 1919 , by a majority vote of the members of the Commons House only of the thirteenth parliament ( which was dissolved on the 4 th day of October , 1921 ) is not binding upon His Majesty or His Majesty ' s government in Canada or the seventeenth parliament of Canada . 
in other words , it asks the sovereign , by resolution of the House of Commons , to cease to exercise his prerogative in Canada . 
that was as ineffective in law as it is possible for any group of words to be . 
it was not only ineffective but I am sorry to say , it was an affront to the sovereign himself . 
about his actions in reviving recommendations to His Majesty for honours , Prime Minister Bennett continued , in the same speech , by saying at page 96 of the Commons Debates : 
the action is that of the Prime Minister ; he must assume the responsibility , and the responsibility too for advising the crown that the resolution passed by the House of Commons was without validity , force or effect with respect to the sovereign ' s prerogative . 
that seems to me to be reasonably clear . 
honourable senators , in my view , any distinguished Canadian who is considered for membership in the United Kingdom ' s House of Lords or any Canadian considered by Her Majesty the Queen for recognition of any kind is a credit to Canada . 
every time a Canadian is honoured , I am honoured . 
we are all honoured . 
canada is that much greater a nation for their achievements . 
i will turn now to Mr. Conrad Black . 
honourable senators , recently the terms " Lord Almost " and " Lord Nearly Nearly " have been used to described Mr. Conrad Black . 
i distinguish between good satire and ridicule . 
i distinguish between honest criticism and shaming . 
because Mr. Black is rich , some think it is desirable to heap great scorn upon him because somehow he has no feelings . 
i believe that Mr. Conrad Black is a great and distinguished Canadian . 
Mr. Black ' s world is not my world . 
it is not a world in which I have worked . 
his is the world of enormous financial initiatives and enormous financial risk - the world of entrepreneurship , competition , commerce and newspaper production . 
however , it is a world worthy of my respect , even if I have no direct involvement in it . 
i am a Liberal - a classical 19 th century Liberal . 
liberalism taught me to respect those individuals who possess those unique personal characteristics necessary for creating wealth and employment for other people . 
liberalism taught that the employment of people by private enterprise as opposed to the public purse is the true measure of economic wealth in a community . 
honourable senators , it was thought that the greatest achievement Whiggism - that is , Liberalism as a political concept - had given to the world was the political notion that wealth could be created , shared and enjoyed by each and every person , that wealth creation and wealth enjoyment were not subject to the hereditary principle but were subject to individual human ability , initiative , energy and industry . 
Mr. Black ' s life journey from modest means is a triumph for liberalism and the liberal principle . 
similarly , liberalism , as against laissez - faire , believed that governments must intervene in the marketplace to protect life , limb and competition and also to provide a social safety net for employees . 
Mr. Black has created employment for thousands of Canadians , a claim few can make . 
i respect that . 
he has also provided competition in the Canadian marketplace of newspapers . 
i believe it is an honour to Canada that the United Kingdom ' s Prime Minister Tony Blair recommended Mr. Black for appointment to the House of Lords as a non - hereditary peer and Lord . 
it is unfortunate that Prime Minister Blair withdrew his recommendation for appointment , and I hope that Prime Minister Blair will see his way soon again to re - recommending Mr. Black . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
senator Cools , I must advise you that the normal period of time allotted for your speech has elapsed . 
however , if you ask for leave and it is given , you may continue . 
senator Cools : 
thank you , Your Honour . 
i would ask leave to continue . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Cools : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
publishing greats Lord Thompson and Mr. Black are both a credit to Canada , as was former prime minister John Turner . 
they all represent an historical exchange which for centuries saw Canadians and Britishers , myself included , white and black , sitting in both Houses of Parliament in Canada and in the United Kingdom . 
honourable senators , human behaviour and motivation are a mystery , as is human frailty . 
this is the human condition . 
the human psyche is an artful dodger , and human motivation is its accomplice . 
this paucity of the human condition was revealed to me poignantly in an article about Mr. Nickle ' s dubiety and spitefulness , written by his relative James Travers . 
in the September 14 , 1999 , Toronto Star article " Black ' s peerless battle for honour continues , " Mr. Travers wrote : 
in a fit of pique and in the absence of then prime minister Robert Borden , Nickle highballed his resolution through the Commons after failing to secure a knighthood for Daniel Gordon , the principal of Queen ' s university and his father - in - law .... 
Nickle ' s revenge was to ensure others didn ' t get what his family had been denied . 
his resolution asking the King to refrain from giving titles to Canadian residents swept through the Commons on a wave of public sentiment he did not share . 
Nickle ' s duplicity is a bit of a family embarrassment - W . F . Nickle was my grandmother ' s sister ' s father - in - law . 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , I have a question and , if Senator Cools will permit , what I believe to be a factual correction . 
i do not think anyone can dispute Mr. Black ' s achievements in the field of publishing . 
however , if you were to examine the financial statements of the companies he controls , you would discover that employment in the newspapers he controls has diminished substantially , not grown , since he acquired them . 
my question for the honourable senator relates to the nature of honours that the senator would deem appropriate for Canadian citizens to accept or to be granted by foreign governments . 
there is a distinction to be drawn between honours that are purely honorific , such as a knighthood or the L é gion d ' honneur , and honours that make one a legislator of a foreign country . 
the House of Lords is a body of legislators . 
they may not have quite as much power as we in this chamber do , but surely we in this chamber are well placed to understand that it is not an empty thing to be a legislator . 
does my honourable friend see a distinction to be drawn between these two types of honours and whether they ought to be considered differently , it being now 50 years or so since an act of peerage was taken up by someone active in the Canadian media business ? 
i note , for example , that Mr. Kenneth Thompson deemed it inappropriate to assume his father ' s title when the late Lord Thompson died . 
senator Cools : 
i thank the honourable senator for her question . 
on the question of honours and foreign governments , I do not consider the Queen of England to be a foreign government . 
i should like to make this point clear and as strenuously and vigorously as I possibly can . 
this is the Queen of Canada , who is my queen . 
when I walked into this chamber in 1984 and was escorted down this very aisle , I put my hand on the Bible and took an oath , and it was to that Queen that I took that oath of allegiance . 
the Queen of Canada is not a foreign government . 
perhaps I misunderstood the senator . 
if I did , I would be happy if she would clarify . 
honours are being conferred all the time . 
Canadians are serving in legislatures all over the world . 
as the senator will recall , I was with her at a meeting of the IPU some months ago , and I encountered Canadian citizens at that meeting who were serving in the legislative assemblies of some Baltic countries , I believe . 
the House of Lords is a Parliament , not a legislature , and there is an enormous difference between legislative assemblies and Parliaments . 
the House of Lords is an old institution . 
it pre - dates most in the world . 
perhaps because many of my dear friends have sat as members of the House of Lords , I belong to that group of Canadians who hold that house in high regard . 
when I was a little girl growing up in Barbados , I was taught to believe that , when all else failed , there was the right of appeal to the House of Lords . 
i do not share in this rush to end the life of upper chambers , including that of the House of Lords . 
finally , on the question of honours , there are endless honours . 
there are honours that confer titles , and others that do not . 
there are honours that confer precedents , and others that do not . 
there are honours that include rank , and others that do not . 
there is a variety of honours . 
i invite the senator to join me in putting forward a proposal here for a study of honours and Canadian entitlement to them . 
in this modern era of the conferring of honours , I do not think that in Canada Her Majesty has been conferring too many hereditary honours . 
i have not been able to find new hereditary honours . 
i listed countless knighthoods in my inquiry . 
the examples that immediately spring to mind are obviously Lord Thompson himself and , of course , the former prime minister of Canada , R . B . Bennett , who , as we know , was made a viscount in 1941 . 
clearly , the point is being obscured . 
the fact of the matter is that Mr. Black was recommended for a non - hereditary life peerage and , in my opinion , that is a noble aspiration . 
on motion of Senator LeBreton , debate adjourned . 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. John B . Stewart , pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
, pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 , at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 7 
Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
criminal Law Amendment Act , 1968 
thirtieth Anniversary of Proclamation 
reverend Father É mile Shoufani 
panel on Access to Historical Census Records 
official Languages Act 
thirtieth Anniversary of Proclamation 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
supplementary Estimates ( A ) Tabled 
francophone and Acadian Communities Outside Quebec 
report Tabled on Deterioration of Services 
adjournment 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 
notice of Motion to Refer Privy Council Vote 25 a to Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
notice of Motion to Refer Vote 10 a to the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
question PERIOD 
solicitor General 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service - Loss of Classified Documents - Review by Security Intelligence Review Committee 
justice 
possibility of Further Assistance to Protect People Against Violence 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possibility of Program for Farm Credit 
agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Efficacy of Program 
efficacy of Aid Programs - Survival of Young Farmers 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Payouts to Applicants 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Request for Visit by Prime Minister 
environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites - Request for Answer 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Leasing - Request for Answer 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
national Defence 
west Nova Scotia Regiment - Appointment of Honorary Colonel 
foreign Affairs 
new Ambassador to World Trade Organization - Possible Consulting Contract with Firm Employing Former Ambassador - Request for Tabling 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
human Resources Development 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading - Debate adjourned 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
francophone and Acadian Communities Outside Quebec 
deterioration of Services - Inquiry - Debate adjourned 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , November 16 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
criminal Law Amendment Act , 1968 
thirtieth Anniversary of Proclamation 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , whether Canadians realize it or not , the passage , on May 14 , 1969 , of Bill C - 150 , the Criminal Law Amendment Act , to legalize contraception and therapeutic abortion , changed our lives irrevocably . 
complications during childbirth were not rare , and only the most serious cases ended up being transported on the back seat of the doctor ' s car to the nearest hospital , and often it was too late to save the baby or perform a caesarean . 
who should be saved , the baby or the mother ? 
the government was equally adamant that contraception was illegal , as was abortion . 
faced with the government and the Church , women had no choice . 
for many of us who worked in OB / GYN , the status quo had become untenable and we decided to work for change so that contraception would be available to women . 
bill C - 150 , or the " Omnibus Bill , " as it is known , passed in 1969 . 
this legislation has done many things for many people . 
in deference to former prime minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau , it began the process of removing the state from bedrooms of the nation . 
sexual preference , reproductive choices and activities were relegated to the private domain , provided they involved consenting adults . 
for women , doors were opened in a radical way . 
there were choices . 
finally women gained a modicum of control over their lives , no longer relegated to a life of endless pregnancy , health risks and children they did not have the resources to take care of . 
this new freedom proved to be a stepping stone for many other freedoms and options that have altered women ' s place in our society - self - esteem , education , jobs , a voice and empowerment . 
honourable senators , I am very proud to have been part of this process and to have seen real change take place as a result of our efforts - efforts which seemed so natural and necessary at the time . 
it stands out among the most important endeavours of my life . 
more than that , this anniversary proves once again that change is possible , that people can make a difference in the lives of others , and that commitment and passion can produce wonderful results . 
let us celebrate and let us salute all of those committed citizens who worked to ensure the freedoms inherent in Bill C - 150 . 
reverend Father É mile Shoufani 
hon. Pierre De Ban é : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to speak to you of the recent visit to Canada , from October 10 to 25 , of the Reverend Father É mile Shoufani , Director of St. Joseph ' s Seminary and High School in Nazareth , and parish priest of Nazareth , Israel . 
father Shoufani , familiarly called Abouna É mile by everyone , the Arabic for Father É mile , is a man and a priest with a deep commitment to his Church , the Greek Melkite Catholic Church , his Arab community , and his country of Israel . 
father Shoufani was in Canada at the invitation of the Centre d ' action b é n é vole É milie Gamelin de Joliette , organizers of a heavily attended and highly successful international forum on the stages of life and on ageing . 
i would also like to thank the members of the clergy who spared no effort to make this visit a great success . 
during his visit to Canada , Father Shoufani had in - depth meetings with a large number of public figures , too numerous to mention in their entirety . 
among these were the Prime Minister of Canada , the Right Honourable Jean Chr é tien ; the Speaker of the Senate , the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat ; the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy ; senior officials of the Privy Council , the Prime Minister ' s department , and diplomats responsible for the Middle East in the Department of Foreign Affairs . 
as well , Father Shoufani gave a number of lectures on the situation in the Middle East , one in particular right here in Parliament to the Middle East Discussion Group and another to the Conseil des relations internationales de Montr éal. 
in addition , he gave addresses on specifically religious topics , in particular " the shared future of Christians , Muslims and Jews " at St. Paul University in Ottawa and before the community of Madonna House at Combermere Ontario , where he met the former archbishop of Galilee , Monsignor Joseph Raya , an exceptional man whom I admire greatly . 
father Shoufani also met the Archbishop of St. Boniface , Monsignor Antoine Hacault , and the Bishop of Joliette , Monsignor Gilles Lussier . 
surely one of the most moving moments was the meeting between Father Shoufani and the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau , former prime minister of Canada and a dominant figure on the Canadian political scene for so many years . 
the meeting took place on the occasion of Mr. Trudeau ' s 80 th birthday . 
father Shoufani worked tirelessly to bring together and unite all people in his country , Israel . 
in our country , he has met many Canadians of Arab origin , especially in Montreal and Ottawa . 
he has also met a number of leaders of the Canadian Jewish community , along with the Quebec Jewish Congress , and he visited the French - language Sephardic school in Montreal , the é cole Maimonide . 
what I find most admirable about Father Shoufani is that his deep respect for life cannot be separated from his conviction that we should strive to make life better for all men and that no one has the right to inflict suffering upon others . 
his positive approach to solving problems is striking . 
he is always ready to take the first step to meet others . 
he always tries to understand and to have empathy with other people ' s dreams , as well as their thoughts . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator De Ban é , your three minutes have expired . 
are you seeking leave to continue ? 
senator De Ban é : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator De Ban é : 
honourable senators , É mile Shoufani was born in Nazareth in 1947 . 
as an Arab Christian in the State of Israel , É mile Shoufani has spent 52 years as a witness , through his life and work , to the possibility of reconciling centuries of opposition and violence . 
his life is a testament to the peaceful coexistence of Jews , Arabs , Muslims and Christians in a region that desperately needs a model of peace and reconciliation . 
É mile Shoufani learned , through personal tragedy , the true meaning of forgiveness and respect for others . 
he serves as a model for others to do the same . 
both his grandfather and uncle were killed in the war of 1948 , during the deportation of villagers in Eilabun . 
his grandmother , who suffered through the death of her husband and her son , taught her grandson to forgive . 
he grew up as a part of the Arab minority that remained in the new State of Israel . 
from the hardship he endured during that period of his life , he learned that humility is a virtue , but not poverty . 
a rebel in his teens at St. Joseph ' s Seminary , he was captivated by a deep awareness of the value of life and a restless urge to make a difference . 
he decided to become a priest . 
while in Paris from 1964 to 1971 , following his studies in philosophy and theology , É mile Shoufani read Treblinka , by Jean - Fran ç ois Steiner . 
the work led him to learn more about the Shoah , to visit Dachau , and he returned home having experienced a spiritual transformation and a completely new perspective . 
ordained a priest in the Greek Catholic Church in 1971 , he declared during his first sermon : 
very early in his ministry , as a pastor in different villages of Galilee , Abouna É mile became known as a mediator , not only for the settlement of disputes between religious communities of Christians , Moslems and Druze , but as a strong advocate for a true coexistence , not just in the sense of living side by side , but by truly sharing a common life . 
when the bishop entrusted him with the direction of St. Joseph ' s Seminary and High School in 1976 , Abouna É mile had already earned the trust of everyone in the area . 
the fact that many parents of many religious communities entrust their children to him is the evidence of the magnitude of the confidence and respect that he engenders in their neighbourhoods . 
in 1976 , St. Joseph ' s Seminary had 200 pupils and was on the verge of closing . 
father É mile embraced the challenge of keeping the school open with a will strengthened by his faith . 
he worked on achieving two goals . 
the first was to rebuild St. Joseph ' s into a first - class school that strives for excellence . 
the second was to instill in new generations of students an awareness and knowledge of their separate histories and identities , but with a full commitment to their integration in the State of Israel . 
his first battle was to attract a vibrant body of qualified staff who would share his vision that the school should be concerned not only with instructions but with developing the whole person - " the pupil , as a person , comes first . " 
the second revolutionary achievement was turning the school into an institution that mixed people of different religions , sexes and cultures . 
he said : 
St. Joseph ' s is not a Christian school that accepts Moslems and Druze , but a school where Christians , Moslems and Druze live together . 
together with the school community , É mile Shoufani was constantly striving for high academic standards . 
according to Father Shoufani : 
we have to produce the 20,000 to 30,000 Arab academics who are lacking in this country . 
now , 10 years later , the school can compete with the top schools in Israel . 
today , the school has 1,200 pupils and graduates 120 to 130 women and men annually . 
the revolutionary dynamism that motivated É mile Shoufani 24 years ago has not abated . 
he continues to concern himself with school appointments to the staff and to the board of directors . 
in 1989 , having established the school ' s academic strengths and reputation , Father É mile decided to pursue his second goal , a pioneer project of dialogue with " Lyada " , a leading Jewish school attached to the Hebrew University in Jerusalem , in order " to give our youth the tools for full integration in the State of Israel while retaining their identity . " 
today , the mission for St. Joseph ' s Seminary is " Education For Peace . " 
father Shoufani has declared often : 
i feel I belong to this land , with its long and varied history , as an Arab , a Christian , and an Israeli . 
these differences create no problems for me . 
my faith gives me a universal vision that allows me to transcend the bounds of the particular to be a better listener to my brothers . 
in closing , I should like to add that Father Shoufani was accompanied during his visit to our country by Mrs. Soad Haddad , whom I have had the honour of knowing for over 10 years . 
what is remarkable about Mrs. Soad Haddad is that from her earliest memories she always felt that she belonged more to the larger human community than to an individual family . 
existence for her has always been connected with being on a mission . 
this is what led her to free herself completely in order to devote herself to the work in which she is involved . 
she has been walking side by side with Father É mile for over 20 years in service of the Melkite Church and the Arab community of the State of Israel . 
after everything is said and done , honourable senators , there are essentially two options before each of us . 
one is to maximize the differences between human beings , which is easy to do . 
we can see how many tragic conflicts that principle has caused . 
the other option is the opposite - namely , to emphasize what is common among people of different socio - economic groups , religions and backgrounds . 
the second option is a lot more difficult . 
however , it is undoubtedly the more generous , the more modern , and the one for which all well - intentioned people should strive . 
this option of bringing people together is the principle that Father Shoufani learned from his parents and the one that has guided him throughout his life . 
it is not often that one meets a man of vision and courage like Father Shoufani . 
it was a great honour for me , who was born in his country , to accompany him and his capable assistant , Mrs. Soad Haddad , on their visit to Canada . 
panel on Access to Historical Census Records 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I am very happy to rise today to emphasize to this chamber a recent announcement by the Honourable John Manley , Minister of Industry and Minister responsible for Statistics Canada . 
last Friday , Minister Manley announced the creation of an expert panel on access to historical census records . 
the panel will report to the minister by May 31 , 2000 , with recommendations on an approach that will balance the need to protect personal privacy with the demands of genealogists , historians and archivists for access to historical census records . 
as all honourable senators are aware , I have been lobbying Parliament on this issue for over a year now . 
i am delighted to see the minister taking a proactive approach to this issue and appointing a panel of five well - respected individuals , one of whom is a former colleague of ours , the Honourable Dr. Lorna Marsden . 
i hope that this panel will be able to drum up a few fresh ideas on how to reach an acceptable compromise between the interests of protecting personal privacy and researching our Canadian heritage . 
minister Manley has listened to my lobbying efforts , has taken note of the correspondence of Canadian genealogists , historians and archivists , and has now taken the first step in responding to our concerns through the creation of this panel . 
this is the beginning of results for all the effort that genealogical and historical groups have put into bringing awareness and public voice to this issue . 
i look forward to reading the panel ' s report early next year . 
official Languages Act 
thirtieth Anniversary of Proclamation 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I should like to mark the thirtieth anniversary of the Official Languages Act , which was proclaimed on July 1 , 1969 . 
this act , supported by the vast majority of Canadians , has advanced the cause of language of service and equitable representation within the public service . 
there remains , we must admit , however , a long way to go in the area of language of work . 
i must recognize , in explaining the success of the act , the considerable support of the Commissioner of Official Languages , the various commissioners and the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages of the Senate and the House of Commons . 
i would ask all Canadians to continue to respect Canada ' s unique linguistic duality . 
the Official Languages Act gives English and French equal status , rights and privileges as the languages of Parliament and of the Government of Canada . 
the provinces are encouraged to be generous toward the language minority . 
some do so willingly , others must be encouraged . 
i am well aware of the new efforts that must go into conserving language equality across the country , in both the spirit and the letter of the law , and especially respect for the laws that govern us . 
pages Exchange Program with House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call the next item on the Order Paper , I should like to introduce to you the pages who are with us on the exchange program from the House of Commons . 
Rachelle B é dard is studying political science in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Ottawa . 
she comes from Gatineau , Quebec . 
Marie - Claire Raymond is from Penetanguishene , Ontario . 
Marie - Claire is studying in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Ottawa , specializing in political science and in Spanish . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
supplementary Estimates ( A ) Tabled 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) tabled the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 . 
francophone and Acadian Communities Outside Quebec 
report Tabled on Deterioration of Services 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard : 
honourable senators , I should like to table the report on the structure prevailing at the present time with respect to the development and cultural development of the francophone and Acadian communities , the progressive deterioration of and dwindling access to services in French , and government withdrawal over the past 10 years . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I cannot accept the tabling of a document by a senator unless there is unanimous consent from the Senate . 
do I have it ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that , when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion adopted . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be authorized to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 , with the exception of Parliament Vote 10 a and Privy Council Vote 25 a . 
notice of Motion to Refer Privy Council Vote 25 a to Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) I move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Privy Council Vote 25 ( a ) of the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that a message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that house accordingly . 
notice of Motion to Refer Vote 10 a to the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Parliament Vote 10 a of the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that a message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that house accordingly . 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , I will move : 
that notwithstanding the Order of the Senate adopted on Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , which was authorized to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada : 1 . of the changed mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and Canada ' s role in NATO since the demise of the Warsaw Pact , the end of the Cold War and the recent addition to membership in NATO of Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic ; and 2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member , be empowered to present its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
question PERIOD 
solicitor General 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service - Loss of Classified Documents - Review by Security Intelligence Review Committee 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
there have been media reports across Canada of an unfortunate event involving a CSIS officer who left a secure document on the back seat of her car while attending a hockey game in Toronto . 
could the minister advise the house as to the level of security attached to said document ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for that question . 
obviously it has come to the public ' s attention through media reports , and subsequently confirmed by the minister in the House of Commons , that a rather serious breach of normal security protocol occurred with one of the employees of CSIS . 
that matter is presently being reviewed by the CSIS administration . 
as to the level of security of the particular document in question , I will need to determine if I can obtain that information for the honourable senator . 
senator Kinsella : 
i thank the honourable minister for that undertaking . 
i think it is germane as to whether the document was top secret , secret or confidential . 
parliament established the Security Intelligence Review Committee . 
the statutory mandate given by Parliament to that civilian review committee is to provide oversight of the activities of CSIS . 
is it true that the head of SIRC only learned about this breach through the newspaper , whereas the Solicitor General had knowledge of this matter for quite a period of time - in fact , prior to it appearing in the newspapers ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators will appreciate that I would not normally be aware of how the Inspector General for CSIS became aware of this matter or , indeed , SIRC . 
however , the minister has indicated in the other place that he received notice of it two or three weeks ago . 
i think it was somewhat clear that SIRC became aware of it some time later than that . 
in fact , I can indicate to honourable senators that both CSIS and the Inspector General for CSIS are investigating this matter as we speak . 
in addition , SIRC , on its own initiative , is now doing a review as well . 
i look forward to that report , along with honourable senators , and would be happy to make its details available . 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
could the minister tell us whether there is a rule on the handling of documents in the secret service ? 
can an individual or an agent simply carry documents around ? 
is there a procedure that seemingly was not followed in this instance ? 
the minister has told us the federal government will try to look into this to discover what exactly happened . 
could the minister be more specific on the nature of the upcoming investigation into this unfortunate incident ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , there obviously was a breach of security involved in this incident . 
the individual in question will be part of both the CSIS and the SIRC reviews . 
as the honourable senator will know , SIRC is an independent external review committee that has taken on this task . 
i am sure that both institutions will carry out their responsibilities with due diligence and speed and produce a more detailed review of the events . 
senator Rivest : 
honourable senators , obviously there are problems internally . 
canada and CSIS work with many countries around the world . 
are the minister and the government aware that this incident could seriously damage the credibility of the Canadian secret service ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , fortunately this particular event seems to be an isolated incident . 
while it is regrettable and while one would not deny the seriousness of these events , I would hope that they would not impact in a significant way our relationship with other countries , particularly our allies . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , perhaps the minister can shed some light on why it took two whole weeks for the Solicitor General to advise the committee , which will now , according to the minister in this house , review this matter . 
why a period of two whole weeks ? 
is there not a sense of responsibility in the minds of members of this government when they apprehend a matter like this ? 
parliament established a committee to review matters such as this , and yet the Solicitor General ' s department wastes two whole weeks . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I cannot comment directly on the question of timing since I am unaware of exactly when that information was transferred . 
however , it is my understanding that the Inspector General of CSIS has taken the matter immediately in hand and is addressing it , as is his responsibility . 
SIRC exercises a review role over activities such as the Inspector General would be conducting on these matters . 
i am unaware as to when precisely SIRC would come into the picture . 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , a few years ago there were problems as a result of a leak that concerned the Minister of Finance ' s budget . 
in the end , everyone knew , and the minister had to give a quick budget speech . 
is there a government procedure ensuring the confidentiality of documents ? 
if such a procedure exists , are there varying degrees of quality ? 
for example , we are all aware that the Minister of Finance ' s budget and matters of national security are very secret . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am sure various levels of security classification exist for documents which are handled by CSIS . 
while I am not specifically aware of the details of each level of security , I will do my best to get that information and share it with the honourable senator . 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I am going to come back to this because we were recently told , with respect to transactions with the Americans concerning defence matters , that we were less than reliable . 
the Americans no longer wanted to deal with us and give us certain defence equipment permits because we are apparently not very reliable . 
it is upsetting to be told this by our neighbours , all the more so as our relations with them are generally good . 
could the minister bring this extremely important issue to the attention of the Minister of National Defence ? 
something has to be done , because you can imagine that an affair such as this does not help relations between our two countries . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am certainly willing to pass along the concerns of senators as to the nature of this incident . 
i will indicate the seriousness with which honourable senators view this very unfortunate series of events . 
however , I do not know that I would share the view of the honourable senator as expressed in the preamble to his question . 
the ITAR situation falls under a different category of issues . 
it is certainly a matter of concern when any confidential piece of information or document is mishandled as , evidently , this document was mishandled . 
the investigation is underway not only internally at CSIS but also by SIRC . 
i am confident that the appropriate remedial measures will be taken and that the individual involved will be dealt with appropriately . 
justice 
possibility of Further Assistance to Protect People Against Violence 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
there is concern across the country about the violence being perpetrated by youth upon other youth . 
another area of concern is highlighted by a recent Vancouver newspaper article stating that in B.C. another home invasion has claimed the life of an elderly woman . 
it seems nothing is allowable for self - protection against these crimes . 
i do not wish to get into the gun control issue but , at one time , the farm community was protected by the shotgun . 
people were afraid to attack the residents of those homes because they may themselves be injured . 
under the Criminal Code , pepper spray cannot be used by anyone for self - protection . 
there is no other means of self - protection for citizens in the rural communities and , now , in the urban areas who are subjected to such intrusions , according to the reports of break - ins and rapes and murders , and it is instilling great fear in them . 
if the minister has no knowledge of this issue at the moment , perhaps he could discuss it with his colleagues , in particular , the Minister of Justice . 
is anything coming down the pipe that may be of assistance in providing self - protection for these individuals of whom great advantage is being taken ? 
many people cannot afford a gated property with fences and security guards . 
these people are being left out and are subject to the violence perpetrated by criminals in our society . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the type of situation referred to by Honourable Senator Sparrow is abhorrent to all of us . 
under the Criminal Code the potential exists for harsh treatment of such criminal activity by the courts . 
however , I understand the concern expressed by the honourable senator . 
perhaps the problem stems in part from the way family trends have developed over recent decades . 
at one time a rural or farming family could count on becoming an extended family so that senior citizens were less often left on their own , living in an independent fashion away from other family members . 
i am speculating but I suspect if we compared the situation today with 30 years ago , we would find that many more senior citizens are living on their own , rather than as part of extended families . 
the protection the honourable senator requests is , perhaps , more needed these days for that reason alone . 
i have seen statistics indicating that the number of violent crimes in the general population seems to be declining . 
one must always view such information with some lever of criticism However , for victims of an attack in their own homes , senior citizens especially , this is a serious matter . 
i will certainly forward the concern and the question of the honourable senator to my cabinet colleague . 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possibility of Program for Farm Credit 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate on the farm crisis which is seemingly getting more severe every day . 
on November 2 , 1999 , I asked the minister whether this government would be willing to make some adjustment for farm credit which would provide relief to some farmers who are not able to meet their payments . 
the response by the Leader of the Government in the Senate was positive , namely , that these subjects were being discussed but that he would not give away any cabinet confidentiality . 
is there any indication yet of what the government will do in the area of farm credit ? 
this is one area where the government could set a positive example for the banks and credit unions . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I regret that I cannot give a definitive answer on this topic at present . 
since we last spoke on this issue , the federal government has added another $ 170 million to the AIDA program to allow for more significant help to farmers . 
at that time , we were unsure of the response from the provincial governments . 
we did not know whether they would agree to participate in the program on a 60 / 40 basis , as they did for the original program . 
i am advised that , unless there has been a recent change of heart , that has not taken place . 
the Governments of Saskatchewan and Manitoba both indicated publicly that they would not participate by adding more funds . 
perhaps the honourable senator will know whether there has been any change in that stance . 
i find that response difficult to understand . 
both premiers came here to emphasize the crisis situation and the need for immediate assistance . 
as a matter of fact , in the last five years or so there have been dramatic cutbacks in the assistance the two provincial governments have given to farmers in their provinces . 
when they demanded very dramatically that the federal government do something , the government put $ 170 million into the program . 
perhaps it was not everything the farmers wanted , but it was definitely a positive measure . 
however , the responses of the Governments of Manitoba and Saskatchewan appear to have been wanting . 
senator Gustafson : 
honourable senators , the honourable minister is not answering my question about farm credit , which is a federal responsibility . 
there is no sharing with the provincial governments . 
those monies are advanced by the federal government . 
however , with regard to the AIDA program , in the area in which I live , the people who are getting AIDA money are financially well off . 
the farmers who need the money are not receiving it . 
i should like there to be an inquiry undertaken to find out who is getting the money . 
the poor families that need the money are not getting it . 
that is what I have been told by farmers right across Saskatchewan . 
returning to the issue of the Farm Credit Corporation , will the government provide some relief to farm credit debt ? 
the Farm Credit Corporation is not shared with the provinces ; it is strictly a federal responsibility . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am not trying to dodge the question of the honourable senator . 
i simply cannot answer it today . 
obviously , that issue lies with the minister . 
as soon as I am in a position to give a definitive answer , I will be more than happy to do so . 
honourable senators , both provincial governments involved have expressed , in a very dramatic way , in Ottawa and elsewhere , great concern for the farmers . 
it is not an excuse for them to say that the program is not working perfectly . 
we know that . 
senators on both sides of the chamber made that clear in the emergency debate that the Honourable Senator Gustafson brought to the floor of the Senate . 
however , the program was designed by the federal government in cooperation with the two governments which now , having made their dramatic gestures , have backed away from a real commitment . 
if they did not like the program , they could have suggested that it be revamped . 
the Minister of Agriculture is trying to ensure that the program will work more effectively . 
however , the fact that the program is not working perfectly is no excuse for the actions of both of those premiers . 
agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Efficacy of Program 
hon. Herbert O . Sparrow : 
honourable senators , the Saskatchewan government has put $ 200 million into the program , but it is not being spent because the federal government is not spending its portion of the money . 
there is money waiting to be spent , but the federal government is not organized in order that the money can be distributed . 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate spoke of an extra $ 170 million . 
that is for all of Canada , not for the area where the problem we are talking about exists . 
the department itself stated that it will top up the grants that have already been issued . 
therefore , it is not looking after the majority of farmers , who have received nothing , some of whose applications are still on the desk after six months . 
the Governments of Saskatchewan and Manitoba put into the program the money that they were requested to contribute . 
the leader has stated that the governments agreed to that . 
we are continually told that the governments and the farm organizations agreed to that . 
however , that is not the truth . 
that which was proposed was agreed to , but when the program came out it was different and the provinces said , " No , that is not the program we bought into . " 
the Canadian Federation of Agriculture and all the farmers said , " No , that is not the program we bought into . " 
yes , they will fight it because the money is not getting to those people who are in need . 
surely , Mr. Minister , you can go back and say , " We have discussed this in the Senate chamber and with a large delegation that came to speak to us ; and it is not working . " 
the Senate Agriculture Committee and the House of Commons Agriculture Committee know that this is the case , but we keep saying that it is not our fault . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate ask the Minister of Agriculture to damn well tell us if the government does not intend to do anything , so that we can go down with some dignity ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as was said by colleagues on both sides during the emergency debate , the program is not working effectively and must be repaired . 
there was general agreement on that and that message has been communicated clearly . 
i would not suggest for a moment that that is not the case . 
honourable senators , I am saying that there was an opportunity for the provinces to contribute in a significant way . 
it may be the view of everyone in this chamber that $ 170 million was not enough , but it is a concrete contribution and , in my view , it should have been matched by the two provinces . 
efficacy of Aid Programs - Survival of Young Farmers 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question is addressed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
what the farmers are facing is death by a thousand cuts . 
the older , wealthy farmers can afford to ride this situation out because they have been around for a long time . 
those being hurt are the young people who want to maintain the family business . 
it is death by a thousand cuts , year after year . 
they slowly sink into bankruptcy . 
rather than having the integrity to be honest and say that there will be no more assistance , that if they cannot survive on their own they will be gone , the government hands out money in dribs and drabs to keep a false hope alive . 
that is unconscionable . 
does the minister think that is a fair way to treat the young farmers of Canada ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , we should assist young farmers who find themselves in that critical situation in any way that we can . 
the issue of the Farm Credit Corporation may well be an area that we wish to pursue with the minister . 
this is a major problem which , as honourable senators know , has to do with commodity prices in the world market and the fact that our farmers are not operating on a level playing field with others . 
this is a huge issue with international implications and the solution is to be found at many levels . 
i am assured by my colleagues that efforts are being made and discussions are taking place , not only with the Minister of Agriculture and his department , but also on the international scene , to address the larger issue ; namely , the lack of a level playing field . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Payouts to Applicants 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
though we have seen some valued efforts to look at the situation on the part of the honourable minister , there is still no indication of the urgency of the situation and the crisis . 
it is all very well to talk about the little steps that have been taken with the money or to refer to the international situation ; however , we have here an urgent situation . 
urgent situations require more radical solutions , such as , perhaps , scrapping the AIDA program and doing something completely different to really assist those in need . 
about a week ago , I was told by people in the farming community in Manitoba that about 59 per cent of farmers ' applications had been rejected . 
does the minister have any indication given the apparent restructuring of AIDA , that the situation is improving ? 
how soon will it improve ? 
as time goes by , the situation is becoming worse and worse . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I can assure the honourable senator that both the larger issue as well as the specific issue that she raises on rejection percentages is being monitored on a day - to - day basis . 
whether or not there is significant new data available since the initiatives were taken , I am not certain ; however , I will certainly inquire and relay the inquiry of the honourable senator . 
senator Spivak : 
what is the probation period for this new restructuring before the government concludes that the game is not worth the candle ? 
senator Boudreau : 
as with any program , honourable senators , the minister responsible will monitor it , and in this particular situation , I am sure he will monitor it on a day - to - day basis . 
i hope that the results will make themselves known rather quickly . 
i cannot say when he might exercise his judgment that further changes are necessary or that the program is now operating at a much higher level . 
it would be difficult for me to say when he will make that judgment . 
however , I am sure he will be monitoring it on a day - to - day basis . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the time for Question Period has expired . 
however , I saw Senator Gustafson indicating that he would like to ask a question . 
is that a supplementary question to a previous question ? 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
please proceed . 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Request for Visit by Prime Minister 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , given the crisis , would the Leader of the Government in the Senate convey to the Prime Minister a request that he come out and look at the situation himself ? 
western Canada deserves to have the Prime Minister come out and take a look at the situation first hand . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will certainly bring that representation to the Prime Minister . 
[ later ] 
environment 
Nova Scotia - Responsibility for Cleanup of Toxic Waste Sites - Request for Answer 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , some weeks ago I put a question to the Leader of the Government concerning the stand of the government with regard to liability for abandoned mine sites in Cape Breton . 
bill C - 11 , the bill to wind up Devco , is now before the House of Commons , and I should like to see an answer to that question before the bill arrives here . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should be happy to answer the honourable senator in regard to this question . 
at one time , people were happy to pay for that curbstone legal opinion . 
those are what I refer to as the good old days . 
i have seen legal opinion on this matter . 
the legal opinion I have seen , and I would be happy to share it with the honourable senator and any one else who is interested , is that the bill will not impact liabilities existing prior to the passage of the bill . 
i can provide the information to the honourable senator in much more detail than that and I undertake to do so . 
senator Murray : 
i wish to know the position of the government with regard to the liability of those abandoned mine sites . 
senator Boudreau : 
i can safely tell the honourable senator that the government would love someone else to assume the liabilities . 
however , I do not know whether I could be very confident of that . 
[ later ] 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Leasing - Request for Answer 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I address my intervention to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , as well . 
i asked a question on November 4 with regard to leasing helicopters as a means for possible replacement of the Sea King helicopters , and the minister was to inquire of the minister on that particular subject . 
will an answer be forthcoming , or should I pose the question again during tomorrow ' s Question Period ? 
i am bending the rules , Your Honour , to get my question in . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , to deal with the matter quickly , an answer will be forthcoming . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have delayed answers to four questions . 
first , a question raised in the Senate on November 2 , 1999 , by the Honourable Senator Forrestall , regarding the West Nova Scotia regiment and the appointment of an honorary colonel . 
second , a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 3 , 1999 , by the Honourable Senator Kelleher , regarding a possible consulting contract with a firm employing a former ambassador . 
third , a response to a question on November 3 , 1999 , from the Honourable Senator Roche regarding nuclear disarmament , the policy of the government on the New Agenda Coalition resolution . 
fourth , a response to a question raised in the Senate by the Honourable Senator Oliver regarding efforts to increase employment of visible minorities in the government . 
national Defence 
west Nova Scotia Regiment - Appointment of Honorary Colonel 
the West Nova Scotia Regiment is among the distinguished Reserve units of Canada . 
like all Reserve units , it is an important part of the Canadian defence team . 
with respect to the appointment of a new honourary colonel , an individual has been recommended for the position . 
this recommendation is currently being reviewed . 
foreign Affairs 
new Ambassador to World Trade Organization - Possible Consulting Contract with Firm Employing Former Ambassador - Request for Tabling 
( response to question raised by Hon. James F . Kelleher on November 3 , 1999 ) 
no , Mr. Weekes is on leave without pay from DFAIT and has no contract with the Department . 
that would be a conflict of interest and Mr. Weekes knows well the code of ethics that pertain to his situation . 
2 . No , APCO has no contract with the Government of Canada . 
united Nations 
nuclear Disarmament - Policy of Government on New Agenda Coalition Resolution 
( response to question raised by Hon. Douglas Roche on November 3 , 1999 ) 
after careful , very intensive , high - level consultation , Canada decided to maintain its abstention on this year ' s " New Agenda " resolution . 
our decision was not , for the most part , a response to the text of the resolution . 
this year ' s text has evolved considerably and favourably relative to that we examined last year . 
the Government of Canada also shares much of the New Agenda Coalition ' s assessment of the serious strains on the NPT - based nuclear disarmament and non - proliferation regime . 
in our view , however , concerted action to address the many challenges facing the nuclear disarmament and non - proliferation regime will require the broadest possible base of support . 
the nuclear - weapon States and their partners and alliances need to be engaged if the goals of the New Agenda resolution are to be achieved . 
for our part , we intend to continue to cooperate with all like - minded states in the relevant fora to build greater support for advancing the key aims of the nuclear non - proliferation and disarmament regime . 
as a member of NATO , Canada was pleased to note the increase in the number of NATO non - nuclear - weapon states sharing a common position in this year ' s vote . 
the issues addressed by the New Agenda resolution will be before us again in next spring ' s NPT Review Conference . 
the Canadian Government will be working to ensure that that Conference reinforces the Treaty and restores momentum to the fulfilment of its goals . 
human Resources Development 
efforts to Increase Employment of Visible Minorities 
( response to question raised Hon. Donald H . Oliver on November 3 , 1999 ) 
information on Visible Minorities in the federal Public Service is based on the principle of voluntary self - identification . 
the latest available figures indicate that out of a total of 248 employees at the EX - 4 and EX - 5 levels ( Assistant Deputy Ministers ) , five or 2.0 per cent have self - identified as members of a visible minority group . 
self - identification data is not available for Deputy Ministers or other Governor - in - Council appointees . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lewis , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Murray , before you begin , under our rules you are allowed 45 minutes as the first speaker after the sponsor of the bill . 
however , you did use up 37 minutes . 
therefore , you have eight minutes left . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
i shall do my best . 
honourable senators , I was looking upon this as the second half of a speech which I began to deliver on November 4 , when I opened debate on behalf of Her Majesty ' s Loyal Opposition on Bill C - 6 . 
before proceeding , I wish to correct the record in respect of an inaccuracy that I placed thereon during my speech on November 4 . I was discussing efforts that had been made in the past by various political parties to entrench in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms a right to privacy . 
i stated , mistakenly , that Mr. Chr é tien had been Minister of Justice in the Trudeau government prior to the 1979 election . 
he was not . 
Mr. Chr é tien became Minister of Justice in the Trudeau administration that took office in March of 1980 . 
in the course of my speech on November 4 , I also opened a parenthesis concerning the confidentially of census data . 
that matter was raised earlier today during Senators ' Statements by our colleague Senator Milne . 
i referred to the campaign presently underway which would change the law brought in by Sir Wilfrid Laurier that guaranteed the confidentiality of personal and private information collected in the course of the census . 
at that time , I expressed my opposition to a change in that law as a matter of principle . 
since that time , I have had a number of indignant - indeed , in some cases irate - letters from various people , notably those interested in genealogy . 
show me the safeguards and we will consider them , if and when Parliament is asked to change that law . 
however , on the general principle , I am unmoved . 
i believe that personal and private information collected from individuals by the government in the course of a census on the basis of a law that guarantees confidentiality should be kept confidential . 
i believe , as a matter of principle , that we should not lightly change that law . 
after all , census - taking over the years has become more and more intrusive , and just because people die does not mean that the government should be relieved of the commitment of confidentiality it made to those people . 
that is my opinion , honourable senators . 
in places like the Senate , we should be on guard against the apparent attempts by some historians , social scientists and journalists to persuade us that the right to collect and disseminate information should trump every other right in the book . 
that is why I have advocated that we revisit the idea of entrenching a right to privacy in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
i cheerfully acknowledge that what we have here is a conflict or a clash between two legitimate principles , one having to do with access to information and the other having to do with privacy . 
as in any similar conflict of principles , one must try to strike a balance . 
this clash of principles or of values is also apparent in the bill that is before the house today . 
as I undertook to do , I met with or had telephone conference calls with or read carefully the briefs of a number of parties who are interested in and have concerns about this bill . 
i have not changed my mind about the bill . 
i will not take your time today by trying to anticipate the testimony I trust they will be invited to give before the committee . 
however , I should like to flag some of the main issues the committee will have to address . 
honourable senators , there is extraordinary confusion , which I believe extends right into the government and to its advisors , as to whether and how and where this bill applies to the health care sector . 
senator Kirby , the sponsor of the bill , may well want to address this question when he closes debate on second reading . 
however , he will have to do better than he did with his careful statement to be found on page 120 of the Debates of the Senate of November 4 , where he is reported as having said : 
honourable senators , Bill C - 6 will apply to all industry sectors , regardless of the size of business . 
this includes the health care sector . 
it will provide protection for personal health information it has collected , used and disclosed in the course of commercial activities . 
Mr. Manley and the Department of Industry likewise indicate that the bill does not apply to doctors , patients and hospitals . 
i have to say that this view is questioned - indeed , it is explicitly disputed by many interested parties and their legal advisors . 
for example , it is disputed by the Canadian Health Care Association , which represents the hospitals , the Canadian Medical Association , the Ontario Medical Association and the Ontario Ministry of Health . 
what we have here are different organizations whose view as to the substance of this bill and what should be done about it are diametrically opposed . 
yet , they are agreed on one point - the ambiguity and confusion in this bill regarding its application to the health care sector is something with which the health care sector cannot live . 
the confusion arises , at least in part , because the bill purports to apply to " commercial activity . " 
what is commercial activity ? 
it is stated in the bill that : 
" commercial activity " means any particular transaction , act or conduct or any regular course of conduct that is of a commercial character .... 
that is not a very helpful definition . 
yet , I am told that the federal statutes are full of definitions almost identical to that with respect to " commercial activity . " 
the idea is that they let the courts decide what qualifies as commercial activity in any given instance . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Murray ' s time has expired . 
is leave granted for the honourable senator to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Murray : 
i wish to thank honourable senators for their kindness . 
frankly , I had not focused on the rule that limited the speech of a senator who responds for 45 minutes . 
i had not realized that I had gone as long in my first chapter . 
however , I will not take too much more time . 
the question is whether the doctor - patient relationship , in respect of which there is a fee , or the hospital - patient relationship , in respect of which there is a fee , are commercial in nature . 
whether they are or not , we still have a problem . 
they state : 
in the CMA ' s view , there is no clear way of distinguishing commercial activity from health care activity in a way that ensures that the health care record is subject to different rules than those pertaining to other records . 
moreover , the dilemma for government is that even if such distinction could occur , would it be desirable that health records be subject to no rules ? 
put in another way , will those organizations that currently collect health care information be entitled to claim that since the information forms part of the health record they are not subject to the provisions of C - 54 ? 
as you know , C - 54 was the number of this bill in the previous session . 
they go on to state : 
under such a regime health care records would be subject to an even lower standard than that provided for information collected in the commercial context . 
that is one view . 
the same opinion comes from the Canadian Health Care Association , the people who represent the hospitals . 
a legal opinion that they have obtained from the Montreal law firm of Heenan Blaikie states : 
... not only is " commercial activity " in and of itself a highly ambiguous term , but also its application in the context of today ' s health system is , in our view , totally unworkable . 
in recent years , the health system has evolved into such a complex and seamless web of services , that any attempt to carve out only " commercial activity " within the health system for the purposes of Bill C - 54 could only lead to illogical , senseless and ludicrous results . 
i do not want to oversimplify but , generally speaking , I think it is fair to say that those organizations in the health care field whose activity is clearly and indubitably commercial are opposed to this bill , and they seek an exemption for the entire health care sector from the provisions of this bill . 
when I speak of " those " organizations , I am speaking , among others , of the pharmacists , of the laboratories , of the companies that collect and pay for and sell health care data , whether in the aggregate or otherwise , and of certain research organizations and universities in respect of which there is some commercial component to their activity . 
they believe that the requirement to obtain the consent of the individual before health care data is released is too onerous . 
they believe that the requirement will seriously constrain the ability to assemble a unified body of information for the purposes of better health care policy and management . 
they go so far as to suggest that this bill would result in a serious decline in medical research in the country . 
the Ontario Medical Association says that the bill is inconsistent with Ontario ' s Medicine Act and with Ontario ' s Health Care Consent Act . 
in their view , provincial legislation should prevail . 
all of these people believe that the way to deal with the privacy of health care information across the country is through interprovincial protocols and not through federal legislation . 
at this point , I should say that others who are familiar with existing provincial legislation are not so sanguine that that would be a constructive step . 
indeed , the Ontario law is sometimes referred to as an " access law " rather than a privacy law . 
i do not mean to imply that organizations such as the Ontario Medical Association or the Canadian Health Care Association are indifferent to the privacy of health care information ; they are not . 
again , what we have here is a clash of values or , at least , of priorities . 
running through these presentations of the groups that I have mentioned is what I would call an " institutional concern " for the ability to manage and plan and improve the health care system . 
they see a danger that this bill would impede collaboration between the public and private sectors with regard to the delivery or funding of health care . 
i have even read in one of the briefs that they believe that this would prevent Blue Cross and Green Shield from carrying out the responsibilities that they carry out in Ontario with respect to the health care system . 
they think it would make it difficult if not impossible for the federal government to implement the recommendations of its Advisory Committee on Health Infostructure which reported in February of 1999 . 
against these views , we have the very strongly expressed positions of the Canadian Medical Association and the Canadian Dental Association . 
the Canadian Medical Association insists that ensuring the protection of privacy and confidentiality of the patient record must take precedence over other considerations . 
they believe that this bill is weak . 
they believe that the Canadian Standards Association code on which the bill is based is inadequate in respect of the health care sector , and they believe , as they said , that this bill appears to have access to information as its dominant value . 
the Canadian Dental Association has told us that we must clarify the bill in a number of important respects . 
they argue that Bill C - 6 fails to satisfy basic requirements to protect individual Canadians from misuses of health information by secondary and tertiary users of this information . 
bill C - 6 may achieve many government priorities in the areas of electronic commerce , they say , but the CDA believes that the Senate must act to clarify and strengthen the bill as it relates to personal health data . 
both the Canadian Medical Association and the Canadian Dental Association have drafted amendments that they want us to consider and which would , as I read them , essentially incorporate their own codes of privacy into this federal legislation . 
honourable senators , the committee faces a difficult and complex task . 
it would be tempting to say that , with these sharply opposing perspectives , even in the health care field , the truth probably lies somewhere in between and that the government probably got it right and struck the right balance with Bill C - 6 . 
it would be tempting to come to that conclusion or to make that argument , but it would be altogether too facile . 
first , the committee will need to try to sort out the ambiguity and the confusion with regard to the applicability of this bill in the health care sector . 
health care is altogether too important . 
the privacy of health care information is too important to saddle the sector with this confusion . 
it is clear that they cannot live with it because they have all told us so . 
if it is not clarified , the danger is that this law , once passed , will be more honoured in the breach than in the observance . 
none of us want to see that . 
even if we can clarify the ambiguity as to the application of the bill , how do we respond to the Canadian Medical Association and the Canadian Dental Association and their insistence that the bill be considerably strengthened ? 
should we try to apply the provisions to the entire health care sector , commercial and non - commercial ? 
if we try , do we really have the constitutional authority to do such a thing ? 
finally , we must hear from Health Canada on this matter . 
as far as I know , they were nowhere to be seen during the Commons committee hearings . 
the committee and the Senate need the benefit of the views of the Department of Health on all the issues in this bill as they pertain to the health care sector . 
personally , I would not insist on having the minister , but most certainly senior officials from the Department of Health must come to the committee and examine this bill with us as it affects the health care centre . 
honourable senators , we have a lot of work to do . 
let us get on with it but let us not rush it . 
on a matter of this importance , let us not submit to any artificial deadlines . 
we are not looking down the barrel of prorogation this time . 
we can take the time that is necessary to do it right . 
honourable senators , I thank you for your indulgence . 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I listened with a great deal of interest to the constructive observations made by our honourable colleague . 
he brings to mind and reinforces the importance of our right to privacy and , in essence , our right to be left alone . 
i think it was Justice Brandeis who said that we all should have the right to be left alone , and I would agree . 
the question is whether this bill fills that two - scale need . 
one scale is the scale of economy and the other the scale of social justice . 
many senators facing me today understand the dilemma of balancing economic justice and social justice in a way that is fair to you and me , to the people for whom we are privileged to speak in this house and to all for whom we have a strong sense of responsibility . 
honourable senators , I am particularly delighted to speak to Bill C - 6 today . 
i remember it as Bill C - 54 , the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act , from my time in the other place . 
my delight is all the more pronounced because one of my proudest duties and responsibilities in the other place was to serve as Chairman of the Standing Committee on Human Rights and the Status of Persons with Disabilities . 
we conducted hearings into a great range of privacy issues and , in 1997 , prepared a report called , " Privacy : 
where do we draw the line ? " 
we heard some pretty disturbing stories about the treatment of the disabled and the areas of human rights where they were not being accorded proper consideration . 
we also heard about challenges of new technology in terms of every citizen ' s right to keep others from snooping into their personal stories and then using that information for whatever nefarious reason . 
from our research , I know today that there are many complex parts to this issue . 
much work remains to be done to strengthen our fundamental human rights . 
i will address my remarks today in particular to Part 1 of the bill and to the protection of personal information in the private sector . 
that in no way diminishes my concern for the second part of the bill dealing with electronic documents . 
the provisions in Part 2 of the bill are essential for smoothing the process to electronic commerce which is so important for the Canadian economy today , and that importance will only increase in the years to come . 
i focus today , though , on the definition of " privacy " and the use of personal information . 
the privacy provisions in Bill C - 6 represent a significant step forward for those who have seen the urgent need to buttress the protection of this right . 
by extending the ambit of internationally accepted data - protection principles to the Canadian federally regulated private sector , this bill is taking us one step closer to a comprehensive regime of privacy protection . 
privacy rights and e - commerce privacy laws are already being developed in Europe , in the European Union , at the OECD , in New Zealand and in Australia . 
the Americans are concerned about not having specific kinds of protection on a commercial basis . 
they are broadening the scope of that protection so that they can enhance their commercial activity . 
we must do the same with respect to our commercial activity as well , honourable senators . 
i am pleased we are moving in that direction with this bill . 
i remind honourable senators that privacy is not merely an afterthought in a democratic society . 
since 1983 , Canada has had federal data - protection legislation in the Privacy Act . Privacy Commissioner Bruce Philips addresses these issues , along with matters under the Access to Information Act . 
those two acts may sometimes collide , but both have the obligation to protect all citizens . 
the Privacy Act governs the collection , use and disclosure of personal information by government institutions . 
it is quite strong and so far has been effective . 
commissioner Phillips has handled that mantel very effectively , in my opinion . 
the Privacy Commissioner of Canada has argued that the force that animates decent societies is observance of the principle of fairness . 
we are to treat each other with a reasonable degree of respect . 
we are not to go around behind each other ' s backs with little pieces of information we can use against one another . 
bill C - 6 is a measure of the observance of that principle of fairness and decency . 
i believe the bill has achieved the delicate balance required between the need for Canadian businesses to have access to personal information in order to conduct their business and the need of all individuals to control the collection , use and disclosure of their personal information . 
many of us have had our mailboxes stuffed with several new kinds of mailings . 
i believe that if we looked back and asked ourselves what magazine subscription did we buy , or where did we last use our visa card , we might be able to account for what is coming through our door , in our mail and over our telephones , and we would not be so surprised . 
however , we are surprised because our names get sold . 
each of us is a business , a commodity . 
to what extent do we wish to control that commodity in the interests of personal information ? 
the effort to strike that balance is evident in the purpose clause of the bill . 
i would agree that some amendments are needed for greater clarification . 
whether we will reach that compromise and that understanding I do not know , however , I certainly would feel more comfortable if that issue was broadened and examined . 
the privacy provisions in the bill acknowledge that we live in an era in which technology increasingly facilitates a circulation and exchange of information . 
i should like everyone to please remember that particular phrase . 
bill C - 6 is not a panacea for all the threats to privacy that modern democratic societies face ; however , it deals with one important element of privacy , and that is personal data that may come into the hands of organizations in Canada . 
the bill provides consumers with rights with respect to their personal information , while respecting legitimate business needs to gather and use this information . 
consumers must feel confident - and that is very important with the Internet - and we must build a sense of trust . 
if our businesses want to profit and grow , they must develop a sense of trust with the people who are using their services . 
therefore , the sense of confidence of the consumer that their information will be protected in electronic transactions is absolutely fundamental . 
at the same time , efforts to protect information relating to individuals must not be so heavy handed as to be unnecessarily costly for business . 
the new legislation will require businesses to adhere to a set of fair information practices which were developed by representatives from industry . 
consumer advocacy groups , unions and government , and various health sectors were consulted under this CSA act . 
i believe it is a very broad expression of concern and needs to be taken into consideration in that regard . 
they are fair information practices and they are called the Canadian Standards Association model . 
this model has been tested now since 1996 and it is attached to the bill as a schedule . 
the model was developed by civil society , business , industry , professionals and NGOs . 
i believe that is where one of the amendments might well be considered , because it is such a broad - based description and covers a wide spectrum of business undertakings in Canada . 
this model sets out the obligations of businesses that collect , use and disclose personal information . 
companies must inform individuals of the purposes for which the data were collected , obtain their consent before using or disclosing the information , ensure that the information is accurate for the purposes for which it was collected - not any old purpose in the world , but for the purpose for which it was collected - and protect it with adequate security . 
the standard also establishes the right of data subjects to see and correct their records and complain to someone about problems . 
subjects may complain to someone in the company that is seemingly abusing or misusing or misdirecting that information , and have someone responsible answer to the problem and take action . 
there will undoubtedly be debate about the refinements that may be necessary to make the bill more effective . 
i remind honourable senators that legislation is rarely perfect in its initial form ; in fact , there is not much in this imperfect world that is perfect . 
experiences with the legislation as it matures will point the way to amendments that make it operate more effectively and more efficiently in the protection of privacy , while respecting the legitimate interests of Canadian businesses to the extent possible . 
a question was raised by one of the senators about the health service agency . 
i know about the CMA and I understand that doctors have a Hippocratic oath , a code of conduct and a code of ethics . 
every doctor , dentist and pharmacist should follow those codes of practice . 
that does not necessarily mean we must have a patchwork quilt a mile thick to ensure that individuals in this society do not have their personal rights to identification and information abridged in any way , shape or form . 
honourable senators , I wish to say how pleased I was to see the bill amended after first seeing it in the other place . 
there were 16 amendments and a number of those answered many of my questions and concerns . 
one in particular was about changing the definition of personal information . 
it was a very significant change , for personal information is now anything that relates to an identifiable individual . 
that covers such things as surveillance cameras , cameras in washrooms , medical health information , dental information , pharmaceutical information , pharmacies that deliver drugs , as well as research . 
however , in order to ensure that we do not do anything wrong - this is crucial because our privacy , once lost , can never be regained - it is vital that the definition section ensure that professionals and , for that matter , NGOs , are properly covered . 
i am interested in seeing us move towards an amendment to that part of the definition section of the bill . 
i believe you will find that in Part 1 , clause 2 , of the bill , which the honourable senator read into Hansard today . 
under that interpretation definition it talks about commercial activity . 
what is a commercial activity ? 
if it is a commercial activity then it should be covered and it should include professionals and non - profit organizations . 
that I believe would answer some of the problems that were addressed by these various organizations . 
honourable senators , may I just finish , with your permission ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Finestone : 
we are talking about information that relates to identifiable human beings , and quite frankly , I do not wish to think about them in different groups or circles or little get - togethers . 
in essence , it means that if the information that you have is about me , and you got it because I went to get my insurance policy from you , or be it for my health services , my doctor , or my dentist , it is mine and it relates to me . 
as my grandchildren would say , " It ' s mine . " 
it is mine and stop mining it , and there is no way that you will be able to mine it if we pass this bill properly . 
the whole point about being non - identifiable to those to whom we do not wish to be known - therefore , the right to be left alone - must be insured under this particular bill and under the definition section . 
that is something I should hope we will be able to accomplish . 
i hope the minister will be open to changing that particular definition and making sure that it indicates that we do not care where the information was generated or how it found its way into the commercial world if it has no business being there - it did not receive my permission , it did not receive my review , and I do not want it there . 
i believe that we should also look at the issue of the disclosure of data for research found in clause 7 ( 3 ) ( f ) of the bill . 
we heard many complaints about the use of data for research . 
there are ways to use data without identifying individuals , and that is through non - nominative data . 
there is no reason we cannot have non - nominative data . 
with such data , research can be done without revealing identities . 
the issue raised in this clause is where all this begins and ends . 
honourable senators , in conclusion , this is a very good bill , although it must be fleshed out in some areas and debate must be undertaken in some areas . 
i believe that Bill C - 6 , which is one component of a necessary strategy toward that end , will find favour with this house and will become law . 
i believe that we will be able to do business with the European Union without headaches . 
i believe that we will meet the OECD qualifications . 
most important , I believe that we will protect the personal information of everyone . 
on motion of Senator Oliver , debate adjourned . 
honourable senators , it is a particular pleasure to speak in support of Bill S - 10 , which amends the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code . 
it is in large measure because of the Senate - and more precisely the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs - that this bill exists . 
this bill represents the fulfilment of the commitment made by the Solicitor General last fall when the committee was examining the new DNA Identification Act . 
as you may recall , that act provides for the establishment of a national DNA data bank that will preserve the DNA identification profiles of people who are convicted of serious violent crimes . 
during its review , the committee noted that there was no authority in the bill to collect DNA data bank samples from offenders who are convicted of serious and violent offences in the military justice system . 
the committee raised concerns about the highly sensitive nature of genetic information , about the rapid evolution of DNA technology , and about the potential for infringing the privacy of Canadians in unanticipated and unforeseen ways . 
because of these concerns , the committee recommended , in its sixteenth report , that certain amendments be made to the legislative measures concerning the DNA data bank . 
the Solicitor General undertook to follow up on these recommendations by introducing a separate bill before the establishment of the DNA data bank . 
given that Bill S - 10 deals with the issues raised in this chamber , the Solicitor General made a special request that it be introduced in the Senate before proceeding to the other place . 
i am sure we all appreciate this initiative of Mr. MacAulay . 
let me now turn to the elements of Bill S - 10 . 
it is a highly technical bill , full of cross - references to other legislation , but its main elements are , in substance , quite simple . 
first , in the field of defence , amendments are being made to the National Defence Act and the DNA Identification Act to include in the national DNA data bank profiles of offenders who are subject to the military ' s Code of Service Discipline and who are convicted of serious and violent offences . 
the code applies to military personnel , the reserves and some civilians who accompany military personnel abroad . 
the DNA profile system established in Bill S - 10 for the military closely parallels the system that Parliament has approved for civilians . 
following sentencing for a designated offence , military judges will thus be authorized to order the collecting of samples of bodily substances from persons who are subject to the Code of Service Discipline . 
the provisions of the legislation having to do with the issuing of warrants are adapted to the particular characteristics of the military context . 
military police may request DNA warrants when investigating military offences comparable to the secondary offences defined in the Criminal Code for the purposes of the data bank . 
these amendments represent important improvements over the current law . 
as matters stand now , military police can apply to a provincial court judge for a DNA warrant in the course of an investigation of a designated offence committed in Canada , but there is no avenue for military police to apply for a DNA warrant during an investigation of a designated offence that is committed abroad . 
the designated offence list in the Criminal Code is also insufficient to deal with comparable serious offences under the National Defence Act or with some uniquely military offences - mutiny with violence , for example . 
this bill will give military judges the authority to issue DNA warrants for designated National Defence Act offences so that military police will be able to conduct more efficient and effective police investigations both in Canada and abroad . 
a second broad area of change addressed in this bill is in direct response to the recommendations of the Senate committee . 
this bill gives the Senate the same authority as the House of Commons to review the DNA Identification Act five years after its proclamation . 
these amendments are specifically designed to give Parliament the necessary tools to oversee the effectiveness of the data bank over time , which was a concern of the Senate committee . 
the third major area of change is that the statement of principles in the DNA Identification Act is being expanded . 
this will clarify that bodily samples and the resulting DNA profiles may only be used for law enforcement purposes . 
this amendment is intended to address the concerns of the Senate committee about the potential misuse of DNA profiles , such as using them to identify a person ' s medical , physical or mental characteristics . 
indeed , this goes to some of the issues raised in the debate about personal information . 
the purpose of this data bank is to identify individuals just as fingerprint records do . 
it is not designed to compile information on an individual ' s private characteristics , nor will it do so . 
the amendments to the Criminal Code will mean protection as well against any improper use of genetic data on people subject to the Code of Service Discipline . 
the other amendments to this act will clarify and strengthen the existing regime on the collecting of samples of bodily substances . 
under the new principle I have just mentioned , the Criminal Code will be amended so that the Code of Service Discipline will also be subject to the prohibition against unauthorized use of bodily substances collected and the results of forensic DNA analysis . 
finally , this bill contains a number of practical changes to the Criminal Code to ensure effective implementation of the DNA Identification Act . 
the Criminal Code is therefore being clarified to specify that such an order shall not be made if the prosecutor advises the court that the person ' s DNA profile is already in the national DNA data bank . 
this will make the system more efficient by avoiding the unnecessary expense of collecting and analyzing duplicate samples of bodily substances from repeat offenders . 
to deal with offenders who may be transferred out of a province before a data bank order can be executed , provincial court judges will be able to endorse a data bank order or authorization that was granted in another province . 
two provisions of the Criminal Code , which were not yet in effect , will be repealed because of the negative consequences they would have on the administration of justice . 
they are the obligation for an officer of the peace to inform an individual identified in an order or a warrant respecting forensic DNA analyses that he or she may express a preference as to the bodily substance collected - blood , saliva or hair - and the obligation of the peace officer to act on the preference indicated . 
these provisions pose a problem because nothing in criminal law obliges the police to let an individual who is the subject of an investigation choose the method of collecting elements of proof . 
in addition , as the provincial and territorial representatives pointed out , judges already set out in the warrants the investigation procedure to be followed , and letting the individual choose amounts to allowing their decision to prevail over that of a judge . 
another Criminal Code provision is being repealed . 
it relates to the consensual entry in the data bank of the results from a forensic DNA analysis of bodily substances that have been either voluntarily provided during a criminal investigation or taken under a DNA warrant during the investigation . 
Canadian forensic laboratories have advised that they do not support transferring bodily substances or related DNA profiles to the data bank in these instances because the substances and profiles are routinely retained as case work exhibits in the event of a retrial . 
in addition , samples taken under a DNA warrant , unlike samples that will be collected for the data bank after conviction , have personal indentifiers attached to them . 
this will make it difficult for the RCMP to protect the privacy rights of individuals , as is required by the DNA Identification Act . 
to avoid any potential problems , it is now considered necessary to take new samples of bodily substances in all cases when a data bank order is imposed ; that is , after conviction , . 
in conclusion , Bill S - 10 proposes amendments to the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code to permit effective implementation of a comprehensive DNA data bank . 
the bill not only addresses the recommendations that were made by the Senate committee , but it also fine - tunes the data bank legislation for practical implementation purposes . 
together these amendments , to which we in this chamber have contributed so substantially , will assist in protecting privacy rights of Canadians , while giving the police a sophisticated investigative tool that will improve public safety . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Nolin , debate adjourned . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading - Debate adjourned 
honourable senators , I am pleased to initiate debate on second reading of Bill S - 3 . 
the purpose of this legislative text is to implement the taxation conventions between Canada and seven countries - Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan and Jordan - with which Canada has no taxation conventions at this time . 
as well , the bill creates a new convention to replace the present one with Luxembourg , and implements a protocol amending certain parts of the convention with Japan . 
before I go into the bill in more detail , I would like to take a moment to establish its context . 
in 1971 , when Canada reviewed and revised its taxation system , one of the key outcomes was an expansion of the system of taxation conventions between ourselves and other countries . 
at the present time , we have them with 65 countries . 
honourable senators , you may be interested to know that , since 1976 , 24 tax convention bills have been introduced in Parliament and in the past two years alone conventions or protocols have been established with 14 countries . 
tax conventions are particularly important for Canada because they are directly related to international trade in goods and services and because they therefore have a direct impact on domestic economic performance . 
this impact is a large one . 
Canadian exports now represent over 40 per cent of our annual gross domestic product . 
in addition , Canada ' s annual economic health also depends on direct foreign investment , as well as the influx of information , capital , technology , royalties , dividends and interest . 
it is therefore obvious that the tax conventions provided for in Bill S - 3 will benefit Canadian businesses and individuals engaged in activities and holding investments in these countries . 
Canadian taxpayers will be particularly pleased to learn that a rate of taxation set in a convention cannot be increased without considerable notice . 
in addition , by the mere fact of their existence , tax conventions will create a climate of certainty and stability for investors and marketers . 
this climate can only improve Canada ' s economic relations with each of these countries . 
furthermore , by eliminating the need to pay taxes on certain corporate benefits and by establishing a mechanism for the resolution of problems experienced by taxpayers , it will be possible to reduce the complexity and inconvenience of the tax system per se . 
simplifying the tax convention system will stimulate international activity , which will have a favourable effect on the Canadian economy . 
finally , eliminating or reducing the double taxation that would otherwise arise in international operations will be the biggest benefit . 
if we take into account the convention that is replacing the one in effect with Luxembourg , the purpose of the new conventions provided for in Bill S - 3 is twofold : to avoid double taxation and to prevent fiscal evasion . 
these problems have already been taken into consideration in the convention in force with Japan . 
i should point out that previous tax conventions are generally patterned on the model double taxation convention prepared by the Organisation for Economic Co - operation and Development . 
the possibility of double taxation arises when a taxpayer resides in a country while earning income in another country . 
without a tax convention , both countries could claim tax on that income . 
double taxation conventions ensure that the same income cannot be taxed twice . 
tax conventions signed by Canada deal with this issue in two ways . 
first , by dividing taxation rights between the taxpayer ' s country of residence and the country where the income was generated . 
second , if the income is still taxable in both countries , by demanding that the country of residence deem the income to be tax exempt or granting a credit for the tax paid in the country where the income was generated . 
double taxation conventions also promote the exchange of information between tax authorities , so as to prevent fraud or fiscal evasion . 
this is the second objective of these conventions . 
the sharing of information helps tax authorities identify fraud and tax evasion and deal with such cases . 
as for the conventions provided for in Bill S - 3 , each country will give the appropriate relief for the tax paid in the other country that is a party to the tax convention . 
canada and other countries usually impose withholding taxes on various types of non - resident incomes . 
the country in which the income is generated can withhold taxes , but at a rate that is usually set at 5 , 10 or 15 per cent on branches ' dividends and benefits , and at 10 per cent on interest and royalties . 
in some cases , royalties paid for copyright , software , patents and know - how are exempt at the source . 
for example , the agreement signed with Kyrgyzstan limits the withholding tax rate to 15 per cent for branches ' dividends , interest and benefits , and to 10 per cent for royalties . 
some exemptions are provided for interest and royalties on copyright , software , patents and know - how . 
the convention concluded with Lebanon provides for the withholding of 5 per cent of dividends paid to a company holding at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company paying the dividends and 15 per cent in all other cases . 
branch profits and copyright royalties , software , patents and know - how will be taxed at the rate of 5 per cent , and interest at the rate of 10 per cent . 
in the case of Algeria , a 15 per cent tax will be withheld on all dividends , interest and royalties , and certain exemptions are provided for interest and royalties on computer software and patents . 
the convention concluded with Bulgaria provides for a withholding tax of 10 per cent on dividends paid to a company holding at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company paying the dividends and of 15 per cent in all other cases . 
in the case of the convention with Portugal , a company must withhold at least 25 per cent of the voting power in a company paying dividends to be entitled to withholding of 10 per cent of tax on the dividends . 
in all other cases , a rate of 15 per cent will apply . 
a rate of 10 per cent will also apply to interest and royalties , with a few exceptions for interest . 
in connection with Uzbekistan , the applicable income tax rate applicable to dividends if the beneficial owner is a company which controls at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company will be 5 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends , and 15 per cent of the gross amount of the dividends in all other cases . 
a rate of 10 per cent will apply to interest and royalties , while a rate of 5 per cent will apply to copyrights and royalties for computer software and know - how . 
the new convention with Jordan sets the income tax rate applicable to dividends paid to a company which controls at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company which pays the dividends at 10 per cent , and 15 per cent in all other cases . 
the convention also calls for a rate of 10 per cent on interest and royalties , with certain exceptions applicable to interest on loans made and guaranteed by the government . 
bill S - 3 replaces the present 1989 convention with Luxembourg and calls for a rate of 5 per cent on dividends paid to a company which controls at least 10 per cent of the voting power in the company which pays the dividends , and 15 per cent in all other cases . 
a rate of 10 per cent will apply to interests and royalties , again with some few exceptions for interests and royalties on software , patents and know - how . 
as well , Bill S - 7 modifies the present 1986 convention with Japan . 
the protocol with Japan sets at 10 per cent the taxation rate on dividends between companies and clarifies a number of other provisions . 
among other things , the protocol specifically addresses the issue of Japanese enterprise tax by exempting from such tax Canadian enterprises operating ships or aircraft in international traffic , a courtesy measure already allowed by Canadian provinces to Japanese companies carrying out similar activities . 
honourable senators , the conventions making up Bill S - 3 also address other matters relating to taxation conventions . 
for example , capital gains derived from the alienation of immovable property , shares or interest in a partnership or trust may be taxed in the country of origin . 
discrimination based on a taxpayer ' s nationality is forbidden . 
however , incentive measures such as deductions allowed to small businesses and dividend tax credits available to Canadians will not be affected . 
before concluding , I would like to examine the issue of taxpayer migration . 
four of the conventions provided for in this bill take into account to a certain degree the rules on taxpayer migration that were proposed by the Minister of Finance and that will be included in the Budget Implementation Act , 1999 . 
the purpose of these proposals is to amend the Income Tax Act so that Canada will retain the right to tax gains realized by immigrants during their stay in this country . 
when the bill was announced last December , the minister said that Canada would renegotiate its tax conventions with the new rules in mind in order to avoid double taxation . 
while waiting for these rules to come into effect , Canada has negotiated its tax conventions so as to avoid double taxation at the time when the gains realized by immigrants , before their departure , are taxed . 
with respect to Bill S - 3 , the conventions with Luxembourg , Portugal , Lebanon and Jordan take taxpayer migration into account . 
the conventions with Usbekistan , Bulgaria , Algeria and Kyrgyzstan do not , however , because they were negotiated before the proposals were announced . 
Japan has requested that this issue of taxpayer migration be examined in future negotiations having to do with the convention . 
in conclusion , I wish to emphasize that the purpose of the tax conventions provided for in this bill is to avoid international double taxation of revenues transferred from one country to another . 
these tax conventions will make it possible for Canadian tax policies to be applied uniformly to operations concluded with Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Usbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg . They will also create a climate of stability for Canadian investors and marketers in these countries . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 3 is routine legislation aimed at promoting fair taxation and maintaining good international and trade relationships . 
taxation fairness - which , as we all know , is a priority for the government - demands that no Canadian be subject to double taxation . 
the objective of these taxation conventions is precisely to avoid double taxation . 
in conclusion , I would like to salute the fantastic work of the team of specialists who helped the government through this long and painstaking process . 
these officials served Canada very well under the skilled direction of their respective ministers , the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Justice . 
they deserve our thanks . 
since this is not controversial legislation , I urge honourable senators to support it . 
on motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton , debate ajourned . 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
3 rd day of resuming debate ) 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I am delighted to see the many senators on this side who stayed to hear me this afternoon . 
i therefore intend to make the most of it . 
i am pleased to see the commitment in the Speech from the Throne " to ensure that the Canadian forces have the capacity to support Canada ' s role in building a more secure world . " 
we should not , however , underestimate how much we do to honour that commitment . 
since 1988 , defence spending has declined in real terms , year over year , to the point where today ' s defence budget has a purchasing power roughly equivalent to that of the early 1970 s . 
our ability to acquire necessary equipment and to maintain the equipment we have has been particularly hard hit by the budget cuts . 
personnel in the military regular force , which numbered 87,000 in 1989 - 90 , is forecast to decrease to 60,000 by the end of the current fiscal year . 
we no longer have the ability to organize fighting units at the brigade level , which is the accepted minimum for a sustainable military action . 
according to NATO figures , Canada is now at the bottom end of the scale of NATO countries in terms of its regular strengths and its primary and secondary reserve strengths . 
there are those who claim that the end of the Cold War also put an end to the need for a large , standing military capability and created the prospect of a " peace dividend " . 
as I have stated in this chamber many times , I think they are simply and emphatically wrong . 
while the threats to security and their origins have changed , the world today is potentially far more unstable , nasty and unpredictable than ever before . 
we face the prospect of bloody local and regional disputes spawned by nationalist secessionist movements anywhere in the world . 
we face the threat of terrorism from renegade states and disaffected groups . 
honourable senators , I persist in the belief that the international ripple effect caused by the failure of states will present the most significant security threat to Canada and Canadians for the foreseeable future . 
whether they be in Africa , the former Soviet Union , Southeast Asia , Central or South America , states fail , as we have seen , for any number of economic , environmental or political reasons . 
the failure of states creates a power vacuum which is frequently filled by criminal or terrorist groups that , in turn , cause security problems for other states . 
we need look no further than the former Soviet Union for illustrations of that sort . 
the breakdown of the civil power has given rise to a host of nefarious activities . 
honourable senators , last month , for example , Russian authorities arrested six people in Vladivostok as they were about to take six kilograms of uranium 238 out of the country for sale . 
the uranium came from a plant disassembling parts of the Soviets ' nuclear stockpile and could have been used by terrorists or criminal groups in the manufacture of small , but very dirty , nuclear bombs . 
it is for this kind of threat that we must be vigilant and for which a competent and standing military and security intelligence is required . 
while I commend the government for its commitment to the military , I look forward to more details in the next federal budget . 
the Speech from the Throne articulates the government ' s plans for the advent of the new millennium . 
it has often been said that this Prime Minister and this government lack the " vision thing " , as George Bush used to say . 
there is plenty of rhetoric in the Speech from the Throne about preparing for the millennium . 
i acknowledge the several references to facilitating , for example , electronic commerce and access to the Internet , but these do not constitute a comprehensive vision to secure Canada ' s future . 
the globalization of economies means that all economies have become increasingly interdependent . 
in fact , the day will soon come when there is no such thing as a " domestic economy " . 
there will only be one economy and one market . 
economies , markets and competition will not be limited by national or regional boundaries . 
there will be no boundaries . 
in the meantime , every domestic economy , including Canada ' s , is continually scrutinized by international investors and business people to a depth of detail never before possible . 
advances in telecommunications technology , particularly advances in e - commerce , mean that investment and other decisions can be implemented in milliseconds . 
capital can flow in or out of a country in an instant . 
last year , we witnessed perhaps the first illustration of the impact of these twin forces and e - commerce on the economies and the nations of Southeast Asia and the Pacific Rim . 
the dramatic outward flows of capital represented a vote of non - confidence by the international investment and business communities . 
the impacts reverberate today in individual countries , including Canada , and throughout the world . 
as a direct consequence of the Asian crisis , the Canadian dollar slid in relation to the U.S. dollar as currency traders bought up the U.S. dollar as a hedge against the Asian currencies . 
our exports to the Far East suffered as the crisis depressed commodity prices . 
capital and business are no longer bound by geography , time or national allegiances . 
an economy or government that does not perform as the banks , financiers , investment dealers and credit rating agencies in the financial capitals judge as acceptable can be harshly and swiftly and , yes , arbitrarily , disciplined . 
while we may not like that , it is no less the case that Canada has no realistic option but to put on what has been referred to as an " economic straitjacket " that signals to all that Canada is a good place in which to invest and do business in the new millennium . 
the art of government will be to adjust that economic straitjacket in order to perfect the circumstances and requirements of Canada and Canadians and to protect those things that are special to Canadians and that are part of " the Canadian way " such as , for example , our national health care system . 
notwithstanding , as we stand at the portal of the new millennium , Canada has much to do . 
our total debt , federal , provincial and municipal is too high and continues to rise . 
our levels of personal taxation are excessively burdensome . 
despite significant improvements over the past two decades , our economy is still heavily enmeshed in regulation and red tape . 
we are still heavily dependent on natural resources . 
approximately 40 per cent of Canada ' s GDP is attributable to trade in our natural resources . 
there remain too many barriers to trade , investment and labour mobility within Canada . 
despite considerable progress over the past several years , our basic water , sewage and transportation infrastructures , particularly in our major cities , require substantial renovation and improvement . 
we must do more to enhance our productivity . 
we must do more in education , research and development in order to become the type of innovative and adaptable society that will not only survive but will also be destined to prosper in the new millennium . 
there is still a considerable gap between what Canada is and what Canada can become . 
in that regard , I commend the government for its commitment in the Speech from the Throne to reintroduce legislation to protect personal and business information in a digital world , and to recognize electronic signatures . 
such initiatives are essential if Canada and Canadians are to be able to participate fully in the opportunities offered by the Internet and e - commerce . 
honourable senators , the reference to money laundering reminds me of the commitment in the Speech from the Throne that the government will focus attention on new and emerging threats to Canadians such as money laundering . 
our Department of Finance estimates that between $ 5 billion and $ 17 billion - or , as I read in the paper this morning , between $ 17 billion and $ 40 billion - moves illegally into and through Canada each year . 
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering , which consists of 26 countries , including Canada , the European Commission and the Gulf Cooperation Council has been consistently critical of Canada ' s inaction . 
the commitment in the Speech from the Throne is encouraging . 
however , we have a long way to go . 
honourable senators , I was frankly very disturbed by the fact that the Speech from the Throne made scant reference to the problem of illegal migration into and through Canada . 
we know that , in order to prosper in the new millennium , Canada must continue to attract immigrants from around the world . 
it is a cause for concern , therefore , that Canada is failing to meet its targets for landed immigrants . 
canada attracted 13 per cent fewer landed immigrants in 1998 than in the previous year . 
we appear to be experiencing particular difficulties in attracting skilled workers and professionals . 
however , this does not mean that we can turn a blind eye to the growing problem of illegal migration into Canada from various parts of the world . 
this is a very pressing issue , the root causes of which spring from our refugee determination process . 
honourable senators , political correctness makes it very difficult to have an open and rational debate about our refugee policies and procedures . 
anyone initiating such a debate or questioning the status quo runs the risk of being cast as racist or anti - immigrant . 
it does not seem to help to point out that the most of the illegal migrants are not fleeing persecution because of their religious , political or other beliefs , but are what as known as " economic refugees " . 
also , it does not appear to help to point out that these illegal migrants have broken Canadian law and that is a very poor way to start a new life in Canada . 
i take some pride in the fact that the recent Special Committee on Security that I chaired identified and documented the growing problem of organized illegal migration into Canada before it became a topical issue in the media and before it reached its crescendo of activity and publication this past summer . 
the fact is that illegal migration into Canada undermines the integrity of our entire immigration policy . 
persons who apply to enter Canada through proper procedures and due process see illegal migrants jumping into the queue ahead of them . 
it is also recognized that much of the illegal migration is conducted by criminal organizations . 
not only are these criminal organizations of a particularly nasty variety , they also extract a heavy financial and personal toll from the migrants for the privilege of entering North America . 
many of these migrants are forced into a life of servitude in order to pay off the debts owed to the criminal gangs , the so - called " snakeheads " , who smuggled them into Canada . 
i was pleased to see that a judge in London , England , recently sentenced four people smugglers to jail terms of between 7 and 14 years . 
documents tabled in court indicated that the smugglers had extorted about $ 1 million from their clients . 
the judge characterized their activities as wicked , cruel and ruthless . 
therefore , we are doing no one a favour by winking at illegal migration . 
the people who benefit most from lax enforcement and from our rather naive approach to refugee determination are the criminal elements who profit from the smuggling . 
we must also recognize that illegal migration is not just a domestic issue . 
if Canada is to work closely with the government of the United States to modernize our shared border for the 21 st century , as the Speech from the Throne promises , that modernization must extend to making our other borders less permeable to the organized smuggling of people . 
in my opinion , the problem is not with our laws , the problem lies with enforcement . 
those enforcement problems have been identified time and time again . 
the review conducted by the task force commissioned by the former Minister of Citizenship and Immigration discovered that there is no effective system in place to verify compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by immigration officers on those who claim refugee status . 
furthermore , the department of citizenship and immigration does not monitor the whereabouts of most of the refugee claimants , including the thousands of persons awaiting immigration hearings or who have been designated for deportation . 
fingerprints of refugee claimants are taken at ports of entry in order to be able to determine whether the claimants have a criminal record or pose a security threat . 
however , immigration officers told the Senate special committee that the training and the fingerprinting equipment they are required to use are so inadequate that the prints are largely useless and they are usually simply warehoused . 
what is needed , therefore , are not new laws or policies , but the political will and resources required for implementing and enforcing the laws and policies that already exist . 
the detention of illegal migrants is obviously a sensitive issue . 
unlike the United States and other countries , we do not detain illegal migrants unless we have reason to believe that they constitute a criminal or security threat . 
the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration has stated her opposition to detention on the grounds that the illegal migrants have done nothing wrong . 
to detain them therefore would , in her view at least , constitute an infringement of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
in my view - and I recognize that this is not popular - illegal migrants have done something wrong . 
they have knowingly and wilfully broken Canada ' s immigration laws and that should be sufficient grounds on which to detain them pending their refugee determination hearing . 
however , those processes need to be speeded up . 
the rulings must be timely . 
they cannot expect to detain people for months and months because of insufficient forces to carry out the work promptly . 
honourable senators , finally , I commend the government for its commitment to strengthen the capacity of the RCMP and other agencies to address threats to public security in Canada and to work with enforcement agencies in other countries . 
while commendable , once again , we must come to grips with how far we must go . 
again , I look forward with great interest to seeing the details in the next budget . 
honourable senators , as we wait for the new millennium , we should reflect on the century that has passed . 
this has been a century of tremendous instability , unprecedented in its bloodiness due primarily to misguided nationalism and ideological extremism . 
at the same time , this has been a century of unprecedented advances . 
the world today would be unrecognizable by someone living in 1899 . 
one hopes that we have learned some lessons in the 20 th century , and that the advances we have made will launch us into a new century that is more just , less susceptible to war , the excesses of nationalism and ideology , and where economic and political freedoms are allowed to flourish . 
if we learn those lessons , the new century holds for us and for the world unbounded promise . 
finally , honourable senators , in the complex world in which we are moving , I wish the government well , both this government and whatever governments succeed it . 
it will take a significant amount of wisdom to succeed in the future , far more than has been needed in all the years prior . 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham : 
indeed , I congratulate all honourable senators who have participated in one of the most important debates to take place in the life of any Parliament . 
i particularly wish to thank both the Leader of the Government and the Leader of the Opposition for their generous remarks . 
may I say to Senator Lynch - Staunton and , indeed , to all honourable senators how much I appreciated their patience , good humour and the quality of their advice during Question Period and on other occasions when the former leader of the government was required to participate , at times vigorously , during the various exchanges which took place in the last two and one - half years . 
while there may have been the very rare occasion when it was necessary to move the puck around a bit before approaching the net , I hope that all honourable senators will understand that I endeavoured to provide as accurate and complete information as was possible under the circumstances on all occasions . 
honourable senators , when Vaclav Havel , the President of the Czech Republic , spoke to the combined Houses of Parliament on a recent visit to Canada , he spoke of a world on the cusp of dramatic change . 
" the highest value is humanity , " he said , and " the state exists to serve the public good , allowing the fullest blossoming of human liberties , rights and freedoms . " 
he went on to praise Canada as a pathfinder nation in the creation of a better world , adding that the " Canadian ethic " enjoyed profound respect in his country . 
the Canadian ethic is a perception renowned and widely shared throughout the international community . 
president Chirac referred to it at the Francophonie Summit in Moncton when he spoke of Canada as a " vast country that seeks and invents the rules of peaceful and tolerant coexistence . " 
as President Clinton threw away his prepared text at Mont - Tremblant , speaking from the heart about the historic importance of the Canadian federation , all of us who watched and listened thought of the intellectual foundations on which this country was built , of reform and social justice , of compassion and commitment to people . 
the Canadian commitment to the public good is a concept that lies at the heart of this very special community . 
it has made this decent , civil and tolerant society a place of hope and promise for millions of people the world over . 
as I listened to his wife , Her Excellency the Governor General , deliver the Speech from the Throne on October 12 , it was clear that that ongoing national passion , the passion for balance and service to people , the heart of what we are and where we have come from , remains in spirit as vital and dynamic as it was at the time of our early origins . 
in many ways , honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne took us back to the future . 
the speech maps out a course and a direction for Canadians who long for real identity , real belonging , and all the values which are the anchor of our national identity as this difficult , perilous , yet exciting and adventuresome decade comes to a close . 
now that the government has put our fiscal house in order , and with the impetus of a strong and growing economy , we can move forward to a new era of governance which is fiscally responsible but which wears a human face . 
with continuing improvements in the financial health of the country , we will do more to ensure that Canadian families have more income in their pockets and that Canadian businesses are better able to compete in the knowledge - based economy . 
we began budgeted tax relief even before the budget was balanced . 
our balanced strategy allowed us to cut Canadian taxes by some $ 16.5 billion over three years and , in the process , remove 600,000 Canadians from the federal tax rolls , and still make key investments in areas such as skills development and health care and children , areas that really matter to Canadians . 
however , we know that tax reduction is only part of the equation . 
Canadians want much more from government . They reject the notion of government as a tax collector and an accountant - government based on the short term and the bottom line . 
Canadians do not want big gaps between rich and poor . 
while Canadians have accepted the tough discipline of recent years as part of the duties and responsibilities that citizenship in this great country entails , they have consistently told governments that medicare , for example , is non - negotiable . 
they have reaffirmed that medicare is an anchor of the Canadian identity . 
quality , affordable health care is a cornerstone of Canadian life . 
it is a hallmark of our society , an expression of the caring and compassionate spirit that makes Canada so unique . 
the Speech from the Throne reiterated the Liberal government ' s steadfast commitment to one of the best , publicly funded systems in the world . 
the centrepiece of our innovation effort is the creation of the Canadian Institutes of Health , which will foster state - of - the - art health care research across regions and disciplines , and receive over $ 500 million in funding . 
this government is committed to working with our provincial and other partners to test innovative approaches to home care , to pharmacare and to service delivery in ensuring that Canadians have the best health care system possible . 
honourable senators , a new century is almost upon us . 
knowledge and innovation are the cornerstones to success in the " Softworld " . 
the Speech from the Throne gives a vision of a country that is ready to seize the opportunities offered by a world where knowledge means power . 
in this global village , our researchers compete with the world , not just locally . 
they compete in one global economy , in one market . 
as we all know only too well , this has major implications for public policy , for we are in a global race where national vision is absolutely essential , where partnerships are key and where government provides the framework so as to better unleash the extraordinary energies of Canadians in all walks of life . 
this has meant an active partnership with our universities and laboratories , with our knowledge - based industries and provinces , with our communities and our wonderful and excellent volunteer sectors and cultural organizations . 
this government has recognized that all Canadians must have access to life - long learning and the promise that the digital revolution represents . 
we believe that smart communities are not and cannot be inhabited by the few for whom knowledge is power . 
they belong to all Canadians . 
our Connecting Canadians strategy , which aims to make Canada the most connected nation in the world , is based on our belief that the future of this country will be closely bound to the creation of a fair society that is united in the opportunity to access information . 
through initiatives under this strategy , such as Schoolnet , the Community Access Program , and Computers for Schools , Canada has become a true knowledge democracy - a place where all Canadians are free to travel the information highway first class . 
with the full conviction that the classroom is the engine of our knowledge democracy , we set up the Canadian Opportunities Strategy , which has helped hundreds of thousands of Canadians since 1998 and included the Education Savings Grant , Canada Study Grants , and the Canadian Millennium Scholarships . 
we have developed the infrastructure for and nurtured a healthy research environment . 
that is why we are increasing our support to granting councils and embarking on a bold new venture , creating the 2000 21 st Century Chairs for Research Excellence in Canadian universities . 
university of Toronto President Robert Pritchard pointed out that this initiative alone is the equivalent of recruiting the faculty of a major university almost overnight - a net brain gain of invaluable proportions . 
as the Prime Minister has said : 
it is a place where a healthy environment and a high quality of life go hand in hand , a place where our young people understand that winning is not just about market share but about value and service and commitment to our roots . 
it is a country that speaks with a moral voice and whose citizens are committed to a sustainable , global society and a better world rooted in the rich soil of humanism . 
it is our children who will take us there . 
they will take us there with their genius and their dreams , with their hopes and their love , with their talent and their ingenuity , and with their eyes wide open on a better world . 
however , the challenges facing them are great . 
their responsibilities are overwhelming . 
honourable senators , it is they , our children , who must win the future . 
this government has made a commitment to our tiny babies and our little children . 
our commitment is to the best possible start in life . 
our commitment is to good shelter and nutrition and green neighbourhoods . 
it is to allow parents the maximum amount of time possible with their newborn children in the critical early months . 
it is to help parents who too often must make difficult choices between a job and benefits for their children . 
it is to provide legal regimes which ensure in cases of separation or divorce that the needs of our children come first . 
it is to put more money into the budgets of Canadian families through tax cuts . 
yes , our children have rights . 
they have a right to hope . 
they have a right to dream . 
they have a right to grow up equal in this remarkable country that is a symbol of hope and promise to millions the world over - this place called Canada , this place called home . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , in rising to participate in the debate on the Speech from the Throne , I begin by extending my best wishes and congratulations to Her Excellency as she begins her tenure as the representative of the Crown in Canada . 
these 407 Canadians have been given a great privilege and an awesome responsibility . 
only 407 individual Canadians serve 30 million Canadians in our Parliament . 
as I reflected on the Speech from the Throne and reflected also on Parliament , some of the recurring questions that continued to present themselves were questions such as how well is the ship of state really doing during the watch of we 407 Canadians ? 
is the practice of freedom stronger or weaker ? 
will we be leaving Canada a better place after our sojourn here in Parliament ? 
in reply to these questions , I was drawn to the consideration that a trinity of fundamental institutions lay at the base of our freedom in Canada : 
our highest court , the Supreme Court of Canada , has come under vicious attack from certain quarters . 
some of the most boisterous attacks on the judiciary have come from Reform Party members in the other place . 
in his reply to the Speech from the Throne , the Leader of the Reform Party in the other place stated : 
we have seen the courts increasingly encroach on the prerogatives of parliament to the point where one might argue that one cannot fully interpret the Speech from the Throne until after hearing the speech from the bench . 
well , honourable senators , some listeners may have been amused . 
some may have found that to be a quaint or cute proposition . 
i , personally , was not amused . 
neither was I amused when the Leader of the Reform Party in the other place began to heap great criticism on the courts at various levels for decisions rendered in their assessments of government actions - federal , provincial or territorial - as measured against the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
it was as if somehow the court was to be held accountable for the existence of our constitutional Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
i would quickly remind all Canadians that it took a resolution passed by both Houses of Parliament and by nine provincial legislative assemblies to bring about the Canada Act of 1982 . 
it is important for us in Parliament to assess a government ' s vision and the resulting programs in terms of whether each program will place our courts in a more difficult or a less difficult circumstance . 
as I looked at the Speech from the Throne , I could see nothing to persuade me that the government has anything other than a " do nothing " agenda . 
the government seems to be avoiding serious political criticism with this strategy . 
it is leaving to the courts the difficult tasks of interpreting highly general or loosely knit legislation . 
the government has failed to take sufficient leadership in bringing forth the political and legislative vision necessary for Parliament to function in the manner originally envisaged . 
further complicating the independence and function of the judiciary in recent times seems to be the misunderstanding at some levels in the government of the relationship which ought to exist between the executive and the judiciary . 
honourable senators have paid very close attention to the rendering of the Supreme Court ' s judgment in the Marshall case . 
that case recognized certain treaty rights and caused quite unfortunate outcomes in the province I represent , New Brunswick . 
during this time , the Prime Minister mused about the possibility of the Supreme Court withholding its judgment on Marshall for a period of time to allow the government to introduce regulations necessary to reduce the levels of hostility . 
while we were all anxious to avoid that hostility , we still faced the question of political interference in the work of the highest court of the land and clearly demonstrated how the executive powers are beginning to flex their muscles in the domain of the judiciary and other institutions integral to our parliamentary form of democracy . 
honourable senators , it is dangerous for any prime minister to be asking the courts to do their job in a manner beneficial to the ruling regime . 
the law is the law . 
it should not be bent or customized to suit the preferences of the political party in power at a given time . 
adding to this clouding of the separation of the executive branch from the judicial branch is the virtual knee - jerk reaction of so many members , particularly in the other place . 
in the years that I have been in this house , I have seldom , if ever , heard an immediate appeal to resolve a serious political problem or social policy problem by resorting to the notwithstanding clause of the Charter . 
yet , so often we hear from the other place that the notwithstanding clause can be used to get around a problem . 
parliament must be very cautious when that kind of proposition is brought forward . 
honourable senators , I view Parliament as one of the three fundamental institutions governing the practise of freedom in Canada . 
an examination of the number of sitting days of the various legislative assemblies and the two Houses of Parliament is quite revealing . 
reference the delay in reopening Parliament this fall . 
the House of Commons , the institution meant to embody our democracy in Canada , has averaged less than 120 sitting days per year . 
some members ask why they should bother coming here , that it is a waste of time to sit in Parliament because the government of the day does not bother to listen to its counsel anyway . 
in many cases , even the government ' s own backbenchers are punished by removal from committee , for example , because they opposed the might at the centre . 
such advocates argue that government views the rules of Parliament as little more than obstacles on the course of realizing partisan objectives . 
there are also those who maintain that the inner sanctum of the Langevin Block has collaborated to obscure the actions and decisions of this present government from the purview of Parliament . 
why would the Prime Minister and cabinet minister not have Parliament sit ? 
the answer is obvious , honourable senators . 
stripping Parliament ' s capacity to study legislation and important issues of the day is the technique which has been used by the current government to usurp the prerogative of this institution . 
within one issue , for example , we find evidence of the centre ' s unwillingness to allow Parliament to do its work . 
if you look at the circumstance surrounding the Nisga ' a Final Agreement , brokered between the Nisga ' a Nation and the Province of British Columbia , it was signed by both after it was passed by the B.C. legislature and accepted by the Nisga ' a people . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i have to interrupt the Honourable Senator Kinsella and tell him that his time has expired . 
honourable senators , is leave granted to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , before Parliament had the opportunity to review the Nisga ' a Treaty , the Indian Affairs Minister had signed the treaty . 
accountability to Parliament has been a particularly onerous thorn in the side of this Prime Minister and his cabinet , which has become his private focus group . 
within the cabinet , the Prime Minister has risen above the concept of first among equals . 
the hierarchical nature of this government continues through all ranks as well . 
cabinet quashes the political participation and input of backbenchers , opposition members , committees , and individual citizens . 
at its fundamental level , the accountability of the Langevin Block to Parliament is next to zero . 
this frontal assault on parliamentary accountability is alarming and begs asking whether this Speech from the Throne clarifies whether government is still accountable to Parliament . 
in our Westminister - derived form of government , the accountability of government is the cornerstone of parliamentary practice , and in this governance paradigm it is considered improper for cabinet and the Prime Minister to dominate the policy function of Parliament without proper and meaningful consultation with the general body of members in both places . 
i should like to point out the inadequacy of this government to prevent the erosion of our political system by quoting scholar Philip Norton who , on the topic of the government ' s failure to conduct itself in keeping with the principle of accountability , writes that , over the years , the instruments of Parliament have dulled . 
he states : 
government also became less willing to divulge information to the House . 
... enormous centralized powers are more like those normally associated with an autocratic dictatorship than with a democratic government ... 
and that : 
parliament is the central forum for discussion about the use and abuse of political power . 
let me just turn , in conclusion , to the third institution that serves our democracy , that is , the voluntary and the non - governmental sector . 
it was disappointing , honourable senators , to find not a word in the Speech from the Throne concerning the upcoming world celebration of the role of the voluntary sector in society . 
one looks in vain to find innovative or creative support of the voluntary sector from this government . 
indeed , the opposite is the case . 
nearly every promise made in the Speech from the Throne entailed the central government undertaking one action or another . 
surely , honourable senators , given that the United Nations has declared the year 2001 to be the International Year of Volunteers , the government would have made some effort to indicate our national preparedness to underscore the importance of the non - governmental volunteer associations . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , if I might refer back to Professor Donald Savoie , to whom we have alluded on other occasions , and his recently published book this year , entitled Governing from the Centre . 
professor Savoie , in a razor - sharp analysis of the power of the Prime Minister and the change in politics and power in Canada , stated as follows : 
cabinet has now joined Parliament as an institution being bypassed . 
real political debate and decision making are increasingly elsewhere - in federal - provincial meetings of first ministers , on Team Canada flights , where first ministers can hold informal meetings , in the Prime Minister ' s Office , in the Privy Council Office , in the Department of Finance , and in international organizations and international summits . 
there is no indication that the one person who holds all the cards , the prime minister , and the central agencies which enable him to bring effective political authority to the centre , are about to change things . 
the Canadian prime minister has little in the way of institutional check , at least inside government , to inhibit his ability to have his way . 
with this change in the paradigm , one can fully understand the frustration that members of the other place , and from time to time members in this house , manifest in having no say in the development of policy , but are simply given marching orders to push through a government initiative , sometimes with no reflection on it whatsoever . 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne is the mechanism by which the government of the day outlines its vision for the country and sets the tone in which this institution shall operate . 
clearly , the foundations of our system of parliamentary democracy are threatened and little has been done to repair the damage . 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , we in this chamber are all well aware of the importance , both to individual Canadians and to Canada as a whole , of post - secondary education . 
the benefits that accrue to those who attend colleges , universities and other post - secondary institutions are immeasurable . 
they include financial benefits that enable graduates to achieve a better standard of living for themselves and their families . 
they also include other less tangible but just as important benefits in terms of quality of life , which also enables graduates to play a key role in building their communities . 
in turn , those benefits are passed on to Canada ' s economy and society , through higher tax revenues , cost savings on social programs , and greater social cohesion , for example . 
even more important these days is the competitive advantage that an educated workforce gives Canada in the global economy . 
companies in the growing knowledge and high technology sectors are more likely to invest in a country where they can hire well - trained graduates of quality post - secondary institutions . 
it is clear that the federal government , too , recognizes the critical role of post - secondary education in Canada . 
in the Speech from the Throne , it acknowledged " Canada ' s advantage as a country with the most highly educated workforce in the world . " 
the government further claimed that in the past three years it has taken action to build on that advantage . 
the Speech from the Throne pointed to measures that make it easier to save for a child ' s education and to Canada Millennium Scholarships , which the government says aim to make college and university studies more affordable . 
it also mentioned improved student debt relief and better tax assistance to promote lifelong learning . 
in fact , I believe it actually referred to these measures collectively as " the strategy . " 
the government now says it intends to continue to build on that so - called strategy through several initiatives . 
the Speech from the Throne included the grand pronouncement that Ottawa will : 
... forge partnerships with other governments , public - and private - sector organizations , and Canadian men and women to establish a national action plan on skills and learning for the 21 st century . 
this plan will focus on lifelong learning , address the challenge of poor literacy among adults , and provide citizens with the information they need to make good decisions about developing their skills . 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne listed three components of this action plan , although I sincerely hope others will be added , and soon . 
specifically , the government said it will work with its partners to : 
w make it easier for Canadians to finance lifelong learning ; and 
w provide a single window to Canada - wide information about labour markets , skills requirements and training opportunities - on the Internet , over the telephone or in person in communities across the country . 
honourable senators , these all have the potential to be very worthwhile measures . 
action in these three general areas , which were identified almost two years ago by the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , is certainly necessary , not to mention long overdue . 
i should also like to commend the government for committing itself to improving Canada ' s knowledge infrastructure through such things as the creation of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research , increased support to the granting councils , and greater international research collaboration by Canadian universities and institutes , although the details are , once again , pretty fuzzy . 
research and development is , after all , another key area that was identified by the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education . 
i was pleased that , in keeping with several of our committee ' s recommendations , the government appears to recognize the value of attracting top - notch researchers and encouraging our graduates to pursue careers in Canada rather than going to other countries . 
we must make it more attractive for Canadian post - secondary graduates to stay here at home in order to safeguard the competitive advantage our educated workforce gives us . 
with the increased attention that Canada ' s much - publicized brain drain has received , this is a particularly timely intervention . 
a recent study by the Conference Board of Canada warned that the growing brain drain is threatening to deplete Canada ' s pool of skilled workers . 
furthermore , Nortel Chief Executive John Roth has hinted that his company could leave Canada if nothing is done to stop the outflow of human capital . 
noting that only 7 per cent of Nortel ' s top executives remain in Canada , he was quoted in The Ottawa Citizen November 12 as saying : 
what does having headquarters in Canada mean if most of the company ' s leadership team has left ? 
considering that 22,000 Nortel employees work in Canada and that it hires one - quarter of Canadian - trained graduate engineers each year , this should not be taken lightly . 
even Statistics Canada , which has been criticized for downplaying the brain - drain crisis , has admitted that Canadian graduates who head south of the border tend to be our brightest and our best . 
while a number of causes have been identified for this tragic out - migration , it is clear that Canada ' s system of post - secondary education is a factor . 
i recall to my honourable colleagues another remark attributed to Mr. Roth in The Ottawa Citizen of November 12 . He said : 
the quality of Canadian grads in engineering and computer science is excellent , but I ' m fearful of the quality going down because the education system is not well financed . 
honourable senators , we must ask ourselves whether the measures that the Liberals promised in the Speech from the Throne are sufficient , in the government ' s own words , " to build on Canada ' s advantage as the country with the most highly educated workforce in the world . " 
in fact , if implemented , will they be enough to maintain the quality of our educated workforce ? 
i am concerned that much more needs to be done in the post - secondary education sector in order to achieve the results that the government has promised us . 
i would have felt more comfortable if the Speech from the Throne had offered a bit of substance to back up some of its feel - good buzzwords . 
i would have felt even better if it had addressed certain areas of post - secondary education , which the government appears to have completely ignored , and areas that I believe are critical if we are to move forward with knowledge into the 21 st century and not slide backwards or , if we are lucky , simply tread water . 
keeping in mind the remarks made by Nortel ' s John Roth , I wish to speak in particular of the funding of post - secondary education in Canada . 
federal and provincial support for post - secondary education was identified as a top priority by the committee on which I served . 
the committee also recommended " that the federal government , while continuing to respect provincial jurisdiction , renew its strong commitment to post - secondary education . " 
underfunding of Canadian colleges and universities , in part caused by cuts to the Canada Health and Social Transfer , has resulted in , among other things , higher tuition fees , deteriorating physical infrastructure and equipment , and an inability to attract the best qualified faculty at post - secondary institutions across the country . 
in particular , high tuition fees risk placing post - secondary education out of the reach of many Canadian students . 
the prospect of graduating with crushing student debt loads that are not likely to be offset much by millennium scholarships , for example , can be a big deterrent . 
while it is important to make loans and other assistance available to students , there must be a limit on how much any individual should have to borrow . 
i am wary of the government ' s Throne Speech promise to make it easier to finance lifelong learning . 
if it intends to simply make it easier for students to borrow even more money to add to their debt load , then I do not think that is the answer . 
that would be like putting the cart before the horse . 
if , however , the government is planning to provide more grants and bursaries , or some serious debt remission , then I would view this promise in a much more positive light . 
Canadians will be waiting with interest to see , over the next two years , just what the government has in mind . 
in addition , we will be extremely interested to see how the government and its partners will , as the Speech from the Throne indicated , enable skills development to keep pace with the evolving economy . 
i sincerely hope that it will not simply be a matter of identifying which professions , trades and occupations will be in need of more graduates in the coming years , although that is an important undertaking . 
rather , this initiative should be backed up with concrete measures to assist students to obtain the education and training that is required to meet those identified needs . 
again , Canadians will be following the federal government closely on this issue over the next two years . 
i do not think Canadians should have to wait up to two years for the government to implement the post - secondary education - related promises that it made in the Speech from the Throne . 
i remind the government that action in this critical area is needed now . 
i might also remind honourable senators that this committee report is now two years old , and it was urgent when it was tabled . 
senator Graham was most eloquent in his promises about the future of education in Canada . 
he has a wonderful way with words . 
two years ago , we listened to words of despair from students , educators and researchers about the state of education in Canada . 
it was not a pleasant overview . 
it is timely , therefore , that this government give education a priority place on their agenda on the new century . 
i really must commend Senator Graham for his remarks today . 
honourable senators , I could speak at much greater length about post - secondary education issues and lifelong learning as these are close to my heart . 
indeed , I hope to do so in the near future . 
however , I shall now move to the other aspect of the Speech from the Throne that I wish to address , and that is , the reference to child custody and access issues . 
first , some background is in order . 
i had the honour of serving on the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access which was struck in October of 1997 . 
the government created the joint committee to fulfil a promise it made in order to ensure approval of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , which I chaired at the time , of the new federal child support guidelines . 
as a result , 23 members , representing five parties , spent the next year hearing from hundreds of witnesses and studying very serious issues which affect families affected by separation and divorce . 
in December 1998 , the committee tabled its report entitled " For the Sake of the Children " . 
it included a wide - ranging series of recommendations aimed at making the current adversarial system of child custody and access arrangements more child - centered . 
the most important recommendation involved changes which recognized both mothers and fathers must continue to have an important role in their children ' s lives . 
these recommendations focus on the concept of shared parenting , which involves joint decision - making , with time - sharing and residential arrangements to be worked out between the parents . 
with shared parenting , both father and mother continue to be active in the care and nurturing of their children . 
in May 1999 , the federal justice minister released the government ' s detailed response to the committee ' s report . 
i was pleased to learn that the government is preparing to support the committee ' s key recommendations , calling for a child - centered approach to family law in cases of separation and divorce . 
we were excited , even elated , on the day we learned that the minister was going to act on our recommendations . 
... with its provincial and territorial partners , it will work to reform family law and strengthen supports provided to families to ensure that , in cases of separation and divorce , the needs and best interests of children come first . 
clearly , this reference shows that the government recognizes that child custody and access arrangements are a matter of critical importance for many Canadians and that concerns about the current system will not go away . 
i am hopeful that government is planning to speed up its planned implementation of the shared parenting recommendations included in " For the Sake of the Children " . 
after all , the Speech from the Throne traditionally sets out the government ' s plan of priorities for the session of Parliament whose opening it marks . 
recent reports that a federal general election is expect to be called within 18 months , well before 2002 , may give some Canadians reason for hope for faster progress . 
i trust that their hope is not a false one although , given the Liberal government ' s poor track record so far on custody and access matters , they likely are not holding their breath . 
still , we can always keep our fingers crossed . 
meanwhile , hundreds of children will not be heard , and will feel the heartache of broken families . 
honourable senators , I appreciate being given the opportunity to speak about these two aspects of the recent Speech from the Throne which , of course , contained much more . 
other members of this chamber have been doing a fine job speaking to aspects of it and no doubt others will contribute to this debate . 
i would conclude by expressing the hope that the government will listen to and take into account the very real concerns and the reasoned suggestions raised by my colleagues on this side of the chamber . 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I first must explain what this bill is not . 
contrary to a number of recent newspaper reports and comments , it does not call for the abolition of the Royal Assent ceremony as we know it , and which has been followed here since 1867 . 
the bill provides , in addition to confirming the traditional ceremony , an alternative , known as a written declaration , similar to what is practised in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries . 
the traditional ceremony would be obligatory for the first appropriation bill in a session , and at least once a calendar year . 
honourable senators who were here at the time will recall that a bill nearly identical to Bill S - 7 , which was then known as Bill S - 19 , was introduced in the Senate by Senator Murray , the then leader of the government , in July 1988 . 
senator Doody opened second reading debate a few days later . 
the debate resumed in September but was short - lived , as the Senate ' s majority priorities were elsewhere then and not foreign to the dissolution of Parliament on October 1 . 
the arguments put forward by Senator Doody 11 years ago are still valid today , and many of mine derive from his . 
the latest effort along these lines was before the Senate in the last session and it , too , became a victim of prorogation . 
my remarks , therefore , will be similar to the ones made at that time . 
keeping the Royal Assent ceremony as we know it and allowing a written declaration as an alternative is a subject that has been before the Senate many times . 
in 1983 , Senator Frith presented an inquiry regarding the advisability of establishing alternative procedures for the declaration of Royal Assent to bills . 
following a recommendation in March 1985 by the Special Committee on the Reform of the House of Commons - the McGrath committee - that a new Royal Assent procedure be adopted , the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , chaired by Senator Molgat , recommended changes along the same lines . 
a careful reading of the debate on the report presented by Senator Molgat indicates general support for the idea but disagreement on how to implement it . 
a solution was found through the introduction of Bill S - 19 referred to earlier , a bill that died as a result of prorogation less than three months later . 
bill S - 7 , as did Bill S - 19 , incorporates the principles found in that report . 
section 5 of the Interpretation Act provides that the date of Royal Assent is the date of the commencement of an act if no other date is stipulated . 
while no law outlines the Royal Assent ceremony itself , a description of it can be found in Beauchesne . 
the actual arrangements are the responsibility of the Clerk Assistant of the Senate . 
canada is the only country to retain the formal Royal Assent ceremony requiring the presence of the sovereign or the Governor General or his or her deputy . 
the McGrath report noted that " Canada is still using a practice which was abandoned by the United Kingdom Parliament in 1967 . 
in fact , no other Commonwealth Parliament has maintained the procedure still used in Canada . " 
royal Assent in Great Britain required the presence of the monarch until 1541 , when Lord Commissioners were designated to act on behalf of the sovereign . 
parliament , as we all know , is made up the three entities - the Crown , the Senate and the House of Commons - each of which is essential to a bill being enacted . 
our Royal Assent ceremony brings them together for the final step in the sometimes lengthy process before a bill becomes law . 
while the Crown does not refuse assent , it must still be sought . 
one commentator has written that Royal Assent is still a necessary formality and is at the same time nothing more than a formality . 
i fear , as do others , that what should be an event equal to its significance has become a routine one stimulating little but passive curiosity from those who happen to witness it by accident . 
too often , the Governor General is unavailable , and finding a deputy governor general on short notice is difficult and embarrassing . 
too often , the deputy may be kept waiting beyond the appointed hour because of unexpected Senate proceedings . 
attending members of the House of Commons are usually outnumbered by their officials , particularly if assent is scheduled after the House has adjourned . 
a late Thursday afternoon Royal Assent means a small turnout of Senators . 
the atmosphere is one of indifference rather than of respect for an event which , while largely a formality , is nonetheless an essential one and reminds us of the evolution of the parliamentary system over the centuries . 
there are those who will argue that Royal Assent is archaic and should simply be done away with altogether . 
i will not engage in that debate today except to say that as long as Royal Assent is a requirement , let it be given the standing it deserves by treating the ceremony surrounding it with respect for its significance rather than just a bothersome interruption of parliamentary business . 
what better way of doing this than by having fewer traditional ceremonies during a session ? 
by allowing alternatives , Parliament would , in effect , sanction the importance of the traditional Royal Assent ceremony by making it a special occasion , properly planned and well - attended , rather than an obligation whose repetition dilutes its significance . 
objections to this bill will come from those who fear that it is but the thin edge of the wedge which in time will lead to the end of the ceremonial as we know it today . 
bill S - 7 , however , takes these apprehensions into account . 
the alternative suggested is to allow a non - traditional Royal Assent at times when it is difficult to get the parties involved , to agree on a time suitable to all , and to have more than a corporal ' s guard from both Houses of Parliament in attendance . 
this problem will become more acute once the House , as part of the Parliamentary precinct renovations , moves to the West Block , to be followed by the Senate after the House returns to the Centre Block . 
this alone , I feel , is reason enough to give serious consideration to this bill . 
honourable senators , I have deliberately not gone into a lengthy , detailed argument in favour of Bill S - 7 , feeling that this general outline is sufficient to stimulate interest in it . 
on motion of Senator Cools , debate adjourned . 
francophone and Acadian Communities Outside Quebec 
deterioration of Services - Inquiry - Debate adjourned 
hon. Jean - Maurice Simard rose pursuant to notice of November 3 , 1999 : 
honourable senators , as agreed between both leaders in the Senate , and I hope all senators will be in agreement , I now give the floor to my colleague Senator Jean - Claude Rivest , who will read my speech . 
it could exceed the allotted time of ten minutes . 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
honourable senators , let me first say that I am really pleased to take part , in a rather unusual fashion , in the proceedings of this house . 
as Senator Simard just indicated , he asked me to read the address that he wanted to deliver in the Senate on the tabling of an extremely substantial report . 
incidentally , I urge all honourable senators to read the report . 
it is truly an in - depth and very well - documented study by Senator Simard on the situation of Canada ' s francophone and Acadian communities . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Rivest : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to you about an issue of enormous importance , not only to myself but also to the country . 
i want to speak to you about an issue that has long been close to my heart , an absolutely vital issue in which I have invested much of my political activity : the vitality and development of Canada ' s francophone and Acadian communities . 
after months of personal thought and research and serious , in - depth consultations , my concerns about these communities ' future outlook have become so grave that I dare to term that outlook a national emergency . 
when I use the term emergency , and when I say this emergency is national , I not only base that claim on the results of research , but I also draw on the knowledge and experience I have accumulated in over 30 years of public life : 
i trust the instinct that we all develop in practising our trade to the best of our abilities . 
everything in me tells me that , unless we act immediately and with all the conviction and energy of which this Parliament and this country are capable , it will soon be too late . 
by refusing to act , out of indifference , and out of the comfortable paradigms of our ivory towers , we shall betray the promise of a country that could have been great , if only it had had the courage to do so . 
i say we must act because , if these francophone and Acadian communities that have helped forge a Canadian identity that is recognized and respected worldwide disappear one day , it will be largely because their country ' s leaders abandoned them . 
is this fear not the ultimate paradox ? 
we are afraid to speak out at home about something that produces admiration , respect and indeed envy in all parts of the world . 
we are afraid to remind Canadians that our country ' s founding federation is characterized by unprecedented tolerance between two peoples dedicated to the principle of mutual equality . 
on the threshold of the year 2000 , we prefer to mollify ideological dinosaurs nostalgic for a less noble era , when a Canada of nine provinces plus one was determinedly anglicizing its society and all its citizens , French - speaking , aboriginal , and newcomers . 
that policy led us straight to what Andr é Laurendeau of the Royal Commission of Inquiry on Bilingualism and Biculturalism , over three decades ago , called the worst crisis in Canada ' s history . 
in short , we feel that , if we do not talk about the crisis , it does not exist . 
if we do not admit that the situation of Canada ' s francophone and Acadian communities has become critical , we do not need to do anything about it . 
if we do nothing , we cannot be criticized for having done anything . 
and , in the finest country in the world , everyone will live happily ever after . 
however , honourable senators , that is not all . 
we feel that , if we keep quiet , everyone must keep quiet . 
in other words , when these communities ' leaders dare to speak up and denounce the abuses of which they are the victims , we tell them to keep quiet . 
i beg your pardon . 
first we pretend to be unaware that they exist . 
once the critical moment of timid support has passed and the media interest has died down , however , we quickly bring those troublesome francophones back into line , emphasizing that it will be much smoother sailing if they don ' t rock the boat . 
we take minority francophones hostages to power . 
this federal government , which should be these minorities ' ultimate defender , this government that is constitutionally , legally and morally responsible for ensuring that their rights are respected , attacks the victims , not the guilty parties . 
this government not only refuses to act , but also hits these minorities where they are most vulnerable . 
their funding is cut , as one would refuse food to an animal that does not obey . 
and the leaders of these French - speaking communities , still proud but ever hungrier , quickly realize what they have to do if they want more funding . 
they fall into line . 
these community leaders are told that , if things were managed '' behind the scenes '' , they would get much better results and progress much faster . 
the most troublesome are isolated , using the principle of " Divide and conquer " . 
i realize that there are those among you - and in the other place - who will take offence at these statements . 
you will hasten to list government programs supporting the official languages , and the millions of dollars allocated to those programs . 
you will note the success of Canada ' s French - speaking communities , the Year of the Francophonie proclaimed by the government , the Sommet de l ' Acadie in Moncton , and the Jeux de la Francophonie planned for the year 2001 right here in the National Capital Region . 
you will be proud to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Official Languages Act amendment giving the federal government broader responsibilities toward these minorities . 
and I shall applaud ; I shall congratulate you : 
of course these initiatives are worth the time and worthy of praise . 
but I cannot go home with a sense of duty done , as others in this parliament are tempted to do . 
i cannot do that , because our real duty remains to be done . 
there will always be enough bread and circuses to keep people quiet , but no government can ever take pride in that kind of show when , in the trenches , doggedly brave francophones still battle the forces that seek to annihilate them . 
you can throw us the world ' s finest parties , but those celebrations can never mask the truth about a government that refuses to support these francophones , in the face of its constitutional responsibility to do so . 
not even in education is the battle over . 
you will not hear me congratulate you when I see provincial governments taking their cue from federal disengagement from these minorities , downloading responsibilities , and thus wiping out or threatening the gains francophones have made . 
you can never alter the sad fact that , more than 30 years after the adoption of the Official Languages Act , equal opportunities , equality of people , real or perceived , is far from being achieved . 
you can never make us forget that , more than 30 years after the Dunton - Laurendeau commission recommended that the New Brunswick , Ontario and Manitoba governments introduce official bilingualism , only one of those provinces has agreed to do so . 
the biggest and most powerful province , which half of Canadian francophones outside Quebec call home , still refuses to recognize the Franco - Ontarian minority ' s constitutional rights . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Rivest : 
it took the Supreme Court to convince Manitoba that it had governed practically illegally for nearly a century , while the disgraceful 1984 incidents , in which certain provincial politicians ' spite erupted against Franco - Manitobans . 
we should be ashamed to think that , right this minute , a Franco - Ontarian woman named Gis è le Lalonde and a small team are travelling by car to all parts of that vast province to garner support for a project to enshrine Franco - Ontarians ' rights in the Charter . 
you will tell me that Heritage Canada gave her funding for that trip . 
i defy anyone in this Parliament to do what Gis è le Lalonde is doing with $ 35,000 . 
you want people to be properly appreciative of that gesture . 
you would like Franco - Ontarians to be eternally grateful , when we are giving them crusts of bread to do our work for us ! 
is it not our responsibility to carry the message of the French fact to all parts of the country ? 
the Heritage Canada grant to the Op é ration Constitution movement is so laughably small that one is tempted to believe it was given in the hope that this movement would fail . 
that assumption failed to take into account the calibre of the persons who have decided to carry the torch , come what may . 
is that grant , instead , not a sad symbol of cuts to federal funding for official language communities ? 
what has happened to the principle of equivalence , upheld by the Supreme Court in the Mah é case ? 
how can we hope that these communities will develop when they do not have the same access as does the majority to federal government programs ? 
canada ' s francophones continue to rise up like kites , into and against all winds of adversity . 
canada ' s francophones believed this government when it said they were full and equal citizens , that Canada was a country for francophones , that in Canada they had their place in the sun . 
they believed this government so much that this profound conviction continues to lead them to fight for their rights today , in the hope that eventually this government will join them as a genuine ally , not a deceitful mercenary , in completing this forgotten vision . 
the time has come for us , in this Parliament , to lend all of our efforts , all of our resources , and all of our voices to those who are successfully resisting and have always defied history . 
they are a people who refuse to die . 
honourable senators , I humbly ask you to read the report I tabled earlier today . 
it is a sincere and responsible piece of work , with neither claims to glory nor partisan bias . 
when you read it , I ask you to keep an open mind , open eyes , and an open heart . 
some sections of the report , like some of my statements today , will not please you . 
we can act , however . 
we must act . 
i ask you to think about the following passage , on page 38 of the report . 
it is surprising that , despite all the media coverage , which is aimed much more at causing and fuelling controversy than reporting good news , Canadian public opinion , as noted in Professor Stacy Churchill ' s analysis , has remained strongly in favour of official languages policies over the past 25 to 30 years . 
professor Churchill ' s analysis has also led him to the conclusion that government administrations have failed lamentably in their attempts to inform Canadians of this support . 
this support is the best - kept secret in the country . 
what do these figures tell us ? 
in my opinion , they tell us not only that English - speaking Canadians agree that francophones - and institutions and public services for francophones - have a place among them , but also that the simple existence of French - speaking minority communities in Canadian society is part of English - speaking Canadians ' own identity . 
in their view , being Canadian means that it is normal to accept that , around them , other Canadians choose to live in the other official language . 
these figures also mean that Canadians understand the difference between linguistic duality and individual bilingualism . 
no one is asking that everybody learn and speak both official languages - even though , in a perfect world , that situation would presumably be the ideal . 
i ask you , honourable senators , to take up this challenge to Canada as a whole . 
the time is ripe for dynamic , determined , definite recognition of Canada ' s francophone and Acadian communities . 
the time has come to act , to affirm and to activate the national will to ensure equality between English - and French - speaking Canadians . 
far be it from me , as a former finance minister in my province , to suggest that we go back to the spending sprees that left us with still - too - recent deficits . 
however , governments are now in an ideal financial position to invest again in building a network of institutions that will give these communities an equal opportunity to succeed . 
we must complete this forgotten vision . 
personally , although I consider that this investment in the potential of our French - speaking communities should never have been cut out or cut back . 
increasingly , Canadians recognize that bilingualism is cost - effective . 
recently in Moncton , they saw with their own eyes how a reputation for openness and linguistic skills has opened formerly closed doors onto the world and specifically onto the emerging European economic superpower . 
Canadians heard a President of France paying tribute to a tolerant Canada , not inciting Quebec francophones to separate , as had been many people ' s only memory of a visit by a French President . 
increasingly as well , majority Canadians are concerned about the erosion of the culture and language of their fellow Canadians in minority situations . 
they understand that a Canada without these minority official language communities would no longer be the country of which they are so proud . 
in the fight for the Montfort Hospital , for example , we saw unprecedented and unhoped - for alliances between the Franco - Ontarian community and members of the English - speaking community of that province and of other provinces . 
what are we waiting for to realize that the public has left us behind ? 
what are the governments of this country and the provinces waiting for to realize that the new generations have no interest in destructive language wars , that it is time to move on and build confidently on the foundations we laid three decades ago ? 
why , in the turbulent 1960 s , did the Dunton - Laurendeau commission speak of the worst crisis in Canada ' s history ? 
it did so because it realized that Canada was on the brink of breaking up , that radical - and prompt - action was called for if we wanted Canada to survive the rifts that threatened it . 
increasing numbers of people in Quebec , who had always thought of themselves as French - Canadian , came to say they were Quebec citizens first , and perhaps exclusively . 
Quebec residents , no longer accepting of minority status in Canada , would become a majority in Quebec . 
they realized they would never have full status in a Canada where their fellow francophones had endured so many affronts , where French - language education was still illegal . 
have we forgotten what got us into the present situation ? 
do the premiers realize that their own governments ' historic intolerance was one of the sources of Quebec separatism ? 
does the federal government realize that , beyond any clever strategies or plans A , B , and C against " those darned separatists " , perhaps they should think things through ? 
how many sovereigntists dream of their own country simply because no one has ever wanted to give them what is theirs by right , because their most vital dream has been killed off by assimilationist policies ? 
honourable senators , I do not ask you to turn back the pages of time . 
i do ask you to remember , to become wiser , and to lengthen your historical perspective . 
the report I submit to you contains 42 recommendations , the most important 10 of which form the backbone of our proposed recovery plan for Canada ' s francophone and Acadian communities . 
the task seems daunting , the challenge insurmountable ; but the people of this country are equal to the task . 
we are equal to it . 
our recovery plan is an exciting , positive , and generous social vision . 
however , without the courage to do so , all that we stand for - including this fine place - is meaningless . 
when the walls of Parliament have become walls of silence , silence about the fate of the least powerful citizens , our existence is no longer justified . 
i am confident , however , that you will hear me . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 8 
Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Nova Scotia 
international and National Awards Won by Citizens of Lunenburg 
reform of the Senate 
agriculture 
industrial Hemp - Obstacles in Exporting to the United States 
international Year of Older Persons 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study Tabled 
transport and Communications 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
committee of Selection 
fifth Report Presented 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
natural Resources 
Cape Breton Development Corporation - closure - announced infusion of funds - government policy 
Cape Breton Development Corporation - Bill to Dissolve - Effect on Miners and Staff 
national Defence 
closing of CFB Cornwallis - Removal of Memorial Windows from St. George ' s Chapel 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Leasing 
united Nations 
proposal by Reform Party to Review Membership - Government Policy 
health 
authority for Regulating Substances Entering Rendering Plants - Government Policy 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
committee of Selection 
fifth Report Adopted 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Second reading 
referred to Committee 
visitors in the Gallery 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
visitors in Gallery 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
business OF THE SENATE 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
privy Council Vote 25 a Referred to Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
vote 10 a Referred to Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
criminal Code Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
committee of Selection 
consideration of Third Report - Order Withdrawn 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Debate Continued 
speaker ' s Ruling 
conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life 
inquiry 
federalism and Globalization 
inquiry 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
office of Children ' s Environmental Health 
motion to Establish Adopted 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
Nova Scotia 
international and National Awards Won by Citizens of Lunenburg 
hon. Wilfred P . Moore : 
honourable senators , I rise today to make a statement in recognition of the international and national awards recently earned by the Town of Lunenburg , Nova Scotia and her citizens . 
on Friday , November 5 , 1999 , Lunenburg was presented with the Port of the Year Award by the American Sail Training Association of Newport , Rhode Island , at its twenty - seventh annual meeting held in Boston . 
members of ASTA are from across the Americas . 
this award is presented annually to the community that demonstrates significant support of ASTA and recognizes and encourages sail training . 
it is the first time that the award has been presented to a Canadian port . 
at that same meeting , Captain Daniel P . Moreland , Master of the barque Picton Castle , of Lunenburg , was honoured as ASTA ' s sail trainer of the year . 
captain Moreland successfully circumnavigated the world in Picton Castle with a crew who were mostly novices when they departed Lunenburg in November 1977 for their 18 - month historic odyssey . 
Mr. de Villiers generously donated one - half of his $ 10,000 prize to Lunenburg ' s library to assist it in its good work . 
we congratulate and salute the Town of Lunenburg , Mayor Laurence Mawhinney and councillors , her shipwrights , marine blacksmiths , sailmakers and hospitable townsfolk . 
we congratulate and applaud Captain Daniel P . Moreland and Marq de Villiers for their undertakings and the awards they achieved . 
reform of the Senate 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , last week , the John Hamm Government of Nova Scotia got it right . 
as we head into the 1999 holiday season , this legislative body made a strong move to protect public safety by taking a tough stand against drunk driving . 
in Nova Scotia , drunk drivers are responsible for almost 40 per cent of all fatalities on the road . 
the Hamm government has employed new measures they hope will deter people from drinking and driving , thereby decreasing the number of senseless tragedies and protecting the safety of the people of Nova Scotia . 
beginning on December 1 , new protective legislation will make a second drinking and driving conviction result in a driver ' s licence suspension of three years , up from two years . 
a third offence will result in a minimum 10 - year suspension and fourth - time offenders will lose their licence for life . 
the new law will also provide a 24 - hour administrative roadside suspension for drivers with a blood alcohol level of between .05 and .08 . 
this government has taken on the role of leadership in tightening the laws and getting tough with those who drink and drive . 
now , almost all the provinces have implemented similar suspension programs for drunk drivers and many have achieved substantial success in curbing accidents . 
as federal legislators , we can learn much from our provincial counterparts , as they have obviously been learning from one another . 
the Senate is constantly under attack and portrayed by many as an institution that to most Canadians serves no useful purpose . 
the Continuing Scandal of Canada ' s Senate , which declares that this red chamber , as it exists today , has no real value . 
honourable senators , let us respond by showing Mr. Hoy and the rest of Canada just how important the work is that we do here . 
i believe in the reform of the Senate , but books and articles such as this only add fuel to the calls for its abolition . 
it is time for us to take on the role of leadership . 
let us follow the example set by provincial legislatures such as the Hamm government and show every Canadian exactly how valuable an institution we are . 
agriculture 
industrial Hemp - Obstacles in Exporting to the United States 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I should like to briefly update you on a matter I spoke about a few weeks back in this chamber . 
at that time , Kenex Limited of Paincourt , Ontario , was in a confrontation with U.S. Customs and the American Drug Enforcement Agency . 
i am pleased to report to the Senate that the issue has been almost fully resolved . 
while there are still a few matters to be worked out , a shipment of Canadian hemp seed passed through U.S. Customs a week ago without any problems . 
the DEA and U.S. Customs have agreed not to seize any further shipments of hemp products exported to the United States by Kenex . 
i wish at this time to give full credit to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade for their assistance to Kenex in getting this matter resolved with a positive outcome for this young and enterprising business . 
my congratulations to Kenex . 
this is good news for Canadian farmers . 
international Year of Older Persons 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , the UN International Year of Older Persons is drawing to a close , but the ongoing thrust of this initiative is obviously of major concern to senators since we are older persons . 
there is also the need to devote greater attention to disparities in health care and well - being affecting seniors with low incomes , older people living alone , Aboriginal seniors and older women with mental health problems who are forced onto the streets without a home . 
the Fourth Annual Global Conference of the International Federation on Aging , held in Montreal in September 1999 , issued a declaration . 
it noted with concern that the 1991 UN Principles for Older Persons are still not universally recognized nor adhered to ; neither has the 1982 Vienna International Plan of Action been fully implemented . 
the concluding observations of the UN Human Rights Committee commenting on Canada ' s record of implementing the Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights in November 1998 recommended : 
... that Canada officially establish a poverty line and establish social assistance at levels which ensure the realization of an adequate standard of living for all . 
at the New York meeting , we heard from Third World countries that only 8.5 per cent of their people would reach age 60 . 
in Africa the figure is only 3 per cent , while in Europe 24 per cent will do so . 
it behooves those of us who seek a new world to pay serious attention to these " continents of poverty , " as well as the " islands of poverty " that exist among Canada ' s aging population . 
the subject of older people and poverty needs to be set in the context of development , eradication of poverty and social exclusion , which was highlighted at the Copenhagen World Summit for Social Development in 1995 . 
our Overseas Development Assistance package has at least stabilized after several years of decline , but it does need an increase . 
in addition , it needs to be coordinated with debt relief to the most indebted countries , increased measures for employment and health for the elderly . 
there was a call for the United Nations to convene a world assembly on aging in five years to review the progress achieved by individual member states in the implementation of their National Plan on Aging . 
i have every confidence that this will be approved and that Canada will be able to report favourably on its record concerning the care of the elderly in our midst , who happen also to be vulnerable , poor and homeless . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study Tabled 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Stewart : 
pursuant to rule 97 ( 3 ) , I move that the report be placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
motion agreed to . 
transport and Communications 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , concerning the expenses incurred by the Committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
Cape Breton Development Corporation 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
hon. John G . Bryden : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Senate Committee on the Cape Breton Development Corporation , which report deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
committee of Selection 
fifth Report Presented 
hon. L é once Mercier , Chairman of the Committee of Selection , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 
the Committee of Selection has the honour to present its 
fifth REPORT 
pursuant to rule 85 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Rules of the Senate , your Committee nominates the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool as Speaker pro tempore . 
respectfully submitted , 
l É ONCE MERCIER 
chairman 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Mercier : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I move that this report be taken into consideration later today . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
on motion of Senator Mercier , report placed on Orders of the Day for consideration later this day . 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to religious freedom in China , in relation to the UN international covenants . 
question PERIOD 
natural Resources 
Cape Breton Development Corporation - closure - announced infusion of funds - government policy 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
on Monday , Minister of Natural Resources Ralph Goodale announced that the federal government will sink $ 70 million into the Cape Breton Development Corporation to keep the Crown corporation in operation until April of 2000 . 
this is a complete turnaround by a government which has repeatedly claimed that there are no new federal funds available to improve the pension and severance packages being offered to the Devco miners and their families . 
Devco employees have been fighting for over eight months to get the government to enhance the deal . 
the Liberal government has put up $ 111 million for pension and severance packages , but only 340 miners will qualify for pensions and 650 for severance . 
this federally funded rescue of the coal mining company for the second year in a row is a blatant about - face . 
what is the government ' s explanation for suddenly producing millions of dollars it claimed it did not have to keep in operation the company it intends to shut down ? 
is this a signal that the government has not abandoned Cape Breton and will commit sufficient funds to the Devco miners who were set to end the first year of the new millennium without jobs ? 
j . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I can say categorically and without fear of contradiction that the Government of Canada has not in the past and does not intend in the future to abandon Cape Breton . 
our commitment to Cape Breton continues . 
for example , most recently , in concert with the province , the federal government established a special $ 80 - million development fund to assist the economy of Cape Breton in the transition it is facing . 
the Government of Canada will continue to play its part in assisting the people of Cape Breton . 
specifically with relation to the $ 70 million , the plan to close Devco as a federal Crown corporation was scheduled , in a very phased and organized way , to occur at the end of December , 1999 . I am sure that the honourable senator is familiar with the very detailed human resources package that was assembled and presented in relation to the schedule of closure . 
in order for the government to do that , it was assumed that a certain revenue stream would occur from production in the Phalen mine . 
that was a very large and necessary part of the plan . 
as the honourable senator and others will know , the mine was shut down early under catastrophic circumstances . 
Rockfalls were causing immediate danger to life and limb of the miners so , primarily for safety reasons , the mine was immediately shut down . 
with that immediate shutdown , the revenue stream which would have carried it through to December 31 was gone . 
there government had two choices . 
the first was to provide a revenue stream in order that the government could meet the commitments it had made to the miners and their families under this package . 
i know that the honourable senator would not countenance such an alternative . 
indeed , many groups in Nova Scotia , including members of his own party , indicated that that was not an acceptable alternative . 
therefore , the money was provided in order that the orderly phasing out of the federal presence in the mines could continue . 
as a result , people who were forced to arrange their lives on the basis of this plan will not be disrupted . 
we trust that everything will proceed as planned , and the replacement of the revenue which would have come from coal production is the most viable option . 
Cape Breton Development Corporation - Bill to Dissolve - Effect on Miners and Staff 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , Bill C - 11 , which authorizes the sale of Devco , contains a clause that seeks to delete a section of the Cape Breton Development Corporation Act which states that the government must take every reasonable precaution to ensure that workers are looked after . 
if this bill is passed , will the Liberal government simply close the corporation , give the miners a one - time payment equal to less than one year ' s economic activity generated by Devco , and walk away ? 
if not , what federal initiatives will be implemented to generate new jobs and foster new growth in Cape Breton ' s weakened economy ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , there are very large initiatives underway , and I have made brief reference to some of them . 
an $ 80 - million economic development package over and above the other programs that exist for economic development in that area is a significant effort . 
as well , the package that was presented to the miners and the public in Cape Breton was a very thorough package . 
however , the Prime Minister has given his undertaking that that package will be reviewed , as is currently being done . 
frankly , my concern is not for an electrician working at Devco who will receive an $ 80,000 - or $ 90,000 - severance arrangement and will find a new job six months later . 
that individual will do just fine . 
my personal concern is for any individual who , because of long years of work , and perhaps partial physical disability , will have a difficult time relocating in the new economy . 
as I have mentioned , work is being done to review the package to see if any additional measures can be put in place , in particular , to help those individuals most in need of assistance . 
senator Oliver : 
the minister did not refer to the clause in Bill C - 11 that prompted my supplementary question . 
senator Boudreau : 
i may have undertaken yesterday to give that opinion to Senator Murray . 
i will certainly give it to the Honourable Senator Oliver as well . 
national Defence 
closing of CFB Cornwallis - Removal of Memorial Windows from St. George ' s Chapel 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , the honourable Leader of the Government in the Senate will remember that in 1993 - 94 former Canadian Forces Base Cornwallis was closed by the federal government . 
at that time , stained glass windows were removed from St. George ' s Chapel , on the former base . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate advise when the Department of National Defence will put these windows back in their proper place at St. George ' s chapel ? 
the people who paid for the windows , local residents as well as former recruits of the base , want these windows back in their rightful place . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am familiar with the matter which the honourable senator raises . 
in fact , those windows were removed from a chapel not presently in daily use . 
they are currently in a chapel in Halifax , the largest naval base in the country , that is used on a daily basis . 
a decision was made to put them in that chapel so that people would have an opportunity to see and get the benefit of them on a regular basis . 
i understand the chapel from which they came is being used , but only on a very intermittent basis , once or twice a year . 
the decision , at this time at least , is that those windows should remain in their present location where more people can enjoy and be edified by them . 
there have been some representations made recently , and obviously they are being given consideration , but that has been the rationale to date . 
senator Comeau : 
i have a supplementary question , honourable senators . 
the government leader indicated that the chapel in Shannon Park , which is where they are situated now , is being used on a more regular basis than the chapel at Cornwallis . 
he might want to check the attendance figures , as is sometimes done between the House of Commons and the Senate , to see if in fact the attendance at Shannon is all that high versus the attendance at former CFB Cornwallis . 
however , much more important than attendance at the chapel is the fact that the people who paid for these windows are residents of the area of Cornwallis and Digby , and the fact that thousands of recruits who passed through Cornwallis are scheduled to reunite there next spring . 
i think these people would be very proud to see the windows where they should be rightfully and historically . 
i would ask the honourable leader to support that proposal . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator ' s proposal that I undertake to check attendance at the religious services or the institutions , reminds me of the Biblical injunction , " Let he who is without sin cast the first stone . " 
i do not know that I would be very aggressive about counting heads at any particular religious service . 
however , I understand the sentiment that the senator brings to the floor here , and I will certainly convey it to the minister . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I , too , have a supplementary question . 
perhaps I could throw the first pebble . 
if the minister were to determine where the pews for that chapel are and restore them to the chapel , perhaps the chapel might be a little busier . 
senator Kinsella : 
where are they ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , perhaps I may have an opportunity to speak with the honourable senator later and locate those pews . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Leasing 
hon. Gerry St. Germain : 
honourable senators , my question is also to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it relates to a question I posed on November 4 regarding the Sea King helicopters . 
i have mentioned on numerous occasions , along with Senator Forrestall and others in this place , the urgency that surrounds this particular issue . 
i have gone so far as to say - and I would say this if we had a Conservative government , an NDP government or a Reform government - that if something is not done , and there is an accident , responsibility will lie directly on cabinet , the Prime Minister and the Minister of National Defence . 
like many other Canadians , I believe we have abandoned our Armed Forces with respect to giving them safe equipment . 
cancellation of the EH - 101 s was a political decision , and I am not certain as to whether they would be in service today had the order gone ahead . 
however , in reply to my question yesterday , the Leader of the Government told me an answer would be forthcoming soon . 
could he please give me a more direct or definitive answer at this moment ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with respect to the replacement program for the Sea King helicopters , in one sense I can repeat what I have already indicated to the Senate . 
i have spoken with the Minister of National Defence , who indicated that this is absolutely a top equipment priority for him . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they have all been saying that . 
senator Boudreau : 
he has had some success . 
the government has indicated that it is prepared to commit to major programs , for example , the submarine program . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
what is the cost of the refitting ? 
senator Boudreau : 
he has indicated to me that it is a matter of very high priority with him . 
i have indicated to him , as I will now indicate to honourable senators , that I regard it as a matter of great priority . 
i live in the city of Halifax , and there is not a city in the country where the military is held in higher regard . 
we appreciate greatly the role they play and the sacrifices they make on a daily basis . 
i will certainly lend whatever support I can to the effort to see that the procurement of the Sea King replacements goes ahead as quickly as possible . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , I have no doubt that the intention of the government is to make that procurement . 
that is the key . 
i speak from experience as an active pilot . 
if any aircraft requires 30 hours of service to fly one single hour , honourable senators can imagine just how bad is the condition of these aircraft . 
anyone who knows anything about helicopters knows the stresses and strains that are put on them . 
i say to the honourable leader that I do not believe there is any alternative but to lease . 
we must get the proper equipment into the hands of the military so that they can look after people who decide to venture offshore in a boat - off Nova Scotia or anywhere else . 
i urge the leader to pursue this matter , and I ask him again for a response with respect to leasing . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would remind all senators that the government has made some significant commitments of late with respect to equipment for our Armed Forces . 
i mentioned the submarines . 
for submarines , the commitment is $ 750 million . 
the replacement process for the Labrador helicopters for search and rescue is underway now , and that is a commitment of slightly under $ 800 million . 
there is also a commitment of $ 30 million to modernize Camp Aldershot , as well as a commitment of another $ 300 million in benefits to improve the standard of living of our Armed Forces personnel in the area . 
i do not want to avoid the honourable senator ' s question . 
as a matter of fact , further to my inquiries , I have a delayed answer that I plan to table at the end of Question Period . 
i can inform the honourable senator that there are no present plans to lease helicopters . 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , it is totally unacceptable to expose our military to conditions due to the poor state of the equipment . 
that is not the solution . 
i hate to have to say this , but I cannot adequately describe in words the horror that exists , I am sure , in the minds of those pilots when they have to take up aircraft that require 30 hours of service to fly for one single hour . 
can the honourable senator imagine any other organization in the aviation industry trying to operate under those conditions ? 
senator Meighen : 
they would be shut down ! 
senator St. Germain : 
that is correct . 
as Senator Meighen says , either the Transportation Safety Board or Minister Collenette ' s department would shut them down because the aircraft would be so dilapidated and in such poor condition . 
i urge the leader again to go back to the minister and get him to reconsider that position . 
senator Boudreau : 
i thank the honourable senator for his comments . 
honourable senators , I am repeating myself , but the minister has assured me that the helicopters are his top priority for equipment replacement . 
obviously he agrees , as would anyone who looked at the situation , that the helicopters must be replaced . 
with respect to the helicopters flying assignments , I take some assurance in the fact that the helicopters would not be given a particular mission or service if those in command were not convinced that the piece of equipment was capable of performing that job . 
as to the cost of servicing them , some questions can be asked . 
however , we are involved in that process , and I hope that the replacement process will be completed as soon as reasonably possible . 
united Nations 
proposal by Reform Party to Review Membership - Government Policy 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , this question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the Reform Party , which is the Official Opposition in the House of Commons , released a foreign policy paper stating that , as government , it would review Canada ' s membership in the United Nations . 
since the UN has been , for half a century , a cornerstone of Canada ' s foreign policy , irrespective of the political colouration of the day , what is the government ' s position on such a startling proposal ? 
does the government intend to respond with a clear statement of support for the United Nations or does the government intend to give this proposal the attention it deserves and ignore it ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , in my position as Leader of the Government in the Senate , I wish to indicate the strong and unwavering support of our government for the United Nations as an institution . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Boudreau : 
i find it incredible that any responsible political party would make a statement or take a position such as has been advanced by the Reform Party . 
have they learned nothing from history ? 
that statement should not be given any great attention in order to avoid giving it any credibility . 
i find it incredible that such a statement could be seriously made in this day and age . 
health 
authority for Regulating Substances Entering Rendering Plants - Government Policy 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last July , a most unfortunate incident took place in Manitoba . 
some cattle were poisoned with a highly potent weed killer . 
they were shipped to a rendering plant and may have entered the feed produced by the plant , which was subsequently fed to pigs and chickens . 
luckily , however , there was no evidence of that . 
the federal agency , the Canadian Food Inspection Agency , claims rendering is a provincial responsibility , while the provincial government and the rendering company believe rendering is a federal responsibility . 
what is the position of the government with regard to the federal responsibility for substances entering a rendering plant ? 
also , what is the scientific basis , given the example of the mad cow disease in Britain , for feeding rendered cattle - and who knows what other remains - to pigs and poultry ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the question that the honourable senator has asked . 
it is a question on which I should have my deputy leader at my side , since he is the expert in the cattle industry . 
senator Forrestall : 
i would sooner have your colleague from Cape Breton back there ! 
senator Boudreau : 
the honourable senator raises an important question . 
i am simply not familiar enough with that specific area to respond to the question today . 
however , I will get a response for the senator as quickly as possible . 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
point of order ! 
honourable senators , the opposition would like to invite the government to give consideration to calling the report that was just tabled by the Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Selection . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , we are in agreement and give leave to bring that matter before the Senate at this time . 
committee of Selection 
fifth Report Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fifth report of the Committee of Selection ( Speaker pro tempore ) , presented in the Senate on November 17 , 1999 . 
hon. L é once Mercier : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of the report . 
hon. No ë l Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I would like to say a few words concerning this motion by our colleague the Government Whip and an excellent Chairman of this committee , one of the best in the history of the Senate . 
i would like to express the pleasure those of us on this side feel on the appointment of our colleague Senator Losier - Cool , from the province of New Brunswick , a woman who has made some remarkable contributions since her appointment to the Senate . 
we are very pleased to support the motion by Senator Mercier . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to add a comment to the debate on this report . 
on behalf of this side , I wish to extend our congratulations as well to the person designated in the report to serve as speaker pro tempore . 
she has served as a senator in this place with great distinction , and I know she will fill the role of Speaker pro tempore with that same distinction . 
i , too , compliment the Chairman of the Senate Committee of Selection and all senators who participated in the deliberations and who spoke in support of the report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Second reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Fraser , seconded by the Honourable Senator Gill , for the second reading of Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , before reading my prepared text , I would remind you that Bill C - 7 is in substance and integrally Bill C - 69 , which we had begun to consider before the end of the last session . 
my remarks this afternoon will refer to Bill C - 69 a number of times . 
do not see this as an attempt to mislead you , but Bill C - 69 is the exact equivalent of Bill C - 7 . 
before I begin my speech , I would like to thank Senator Fraser for her support for my interventions in this house and before the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs to amend the forerunner of Bill C - 7 , Bill C - 69 , on the regulatory powers accorded the Solicitor General . 
i would also like to point out that the Solicitor General kindly accepted my amendment proposals concerning this bill last June . 
i am grateful to him . 
this is an important principle of our criminal law system . 
in addition , the Canadian Human Rights Act prohibits discrimination against anyone to whom a pardon has been granted by the Solicitor General of Canada . 
it is important to mention that the pardon does not erase the existence of the conviction and that it may be automatically revoked if the person is later sentenced for a criminal offence . 
in its present form , the Criminal Records Act provides for the consequences of granting pardon , such as keeping an offender ' s record sealed . 
honourable senators , the purpose of the government ' s proposed amendments to the Criminal Records Act , in the form of Bill C - 7 , is to improve public safety . 
their primary purpose is to prevent sex offenders from holding positions of trust with children or other vulnerable groups . 
in pursuit of this goal , Bill C - 7 proposes to add one additional provision with respect to the particular case of the criminal records of pardoned sex offenders . 
the new section 6.3 of the Criminal Records Act would require the RCMP Commissioner to make in the RCMP ' s automated criminal conviction records retrieval system a notation that would inform a police force doing a screening that there is a record of an individual ' s conviction for a sexual offence listed in the regulations in respect of which a pardon has been granted . 
this recommendation was approved unanimously by the federal and provincial justice ministers at their October 1998 meeting in Regina . 
agencies providing services to children and wishing to hire a volunteer or paid employee will now be able to verify whether the applicant has been granted a pardon for a sex offence . 
this verification is subject to two conditions : on the one hand , if the position were to place the applicant in a position of authority or trust with children or other vulnerable groups , and on the other , if the applicant has consented in writing to the verification . 
the notation will indicate to the police force carrying out the screening that its request for disclosure of the record of a rehabilitated individual must be accompanied by the fingerprints of the individual in question . 
if the verification results in the determination that the person has already been convicted of an offence of a sexual nature , the RCMP or police force that performed the check may request the RCMP Commissioner to provide the Solicitor General with any record of a conviction of that individual . 
the Solicitor General may decide the appropriateness of disclosing the contents of the record . 
if authorized by the individual , the RCMP may disclose the information to the organization that requested the verification . 
however , the organization may not use this information for any other purpose than in relation to the assessment of the application . 
in order to avoid abuses , the bill stipulates that the verification may not be used for any other purpose except assessment of an application . 
honourable senators , I am pleased to say that I am totally in agreement with the objectives and principles underlying Bill C - 7 . 
clearly , the safety of our children and other vulnerable groups in society cannot help but be better protected by these new measures . 
however , I must point out that a number of associations , such as the Elizabeth Fry Society and the Criminal Lawyers ' Association , have voiced some reservations about the policy underlying Bill C - 7 . 
their main area of concern is that this bill could threaten the integrity of the rehabilitation system and its role in rehabilitating and reintegrating offenders . 
they point out in particular that the Solicitor General has not established in a satisfactory manner that the present legislation on criminal records and rehabilitation offers society insufficient protection against rehabilitated sexual predators . 
moreover , the John Howard Society and the Elizabeth Fry Society feared that relying on access to rehabilitation records would give a false sense of security by overshadowing other key elements in the selection of personnel for positions of confidence with children or vulnerable people . 
honourable senators , during the work of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs on Bill C - 69 , we took a very close look at this issue . 
in that regard , I would like to deal briefly with the issue of the balance between the rights of people rehabilitated by the Solicitor General of Canada and the rights of children or vulnerable people . 
while some feel that the provisions of this bill seem to challenge the principle of social rehabilitation , which is the foundation of our parole and rehabilitation system , this legislation achieves a certain balance between the rights of a person who has been charged , sentenced and released , and the rights of the children whom we must protect . 
honourable senators , obviously when we are dealing with people who abuse children or elderly persons , a single offence is one too many . 
the consequences are serious and , as parliamentarians , we must do our utmost to avoid any recurrence of such incidents . 
when I say that the bill achieves a certain balance between the rights of the two groups of individuals , I am not trying to minimize or trivialize the problem , but to put it in the proper context . 
when we talk about criminal acts , about the treatment of criminals and about effective and realistic measures to fight this type of crime , we must put things in a comparative context . 
as a lawyer , I can tell you that it is always very difficult to achieve a perfect balance between the rights of people who have demonstrated that they could lead a normal life , and making sure that the rehabilitation system does not become a mechanism that hides the history of people who could be a threat for children and other vulnerable persons . 
this is a thorny issue . 
therefore , the federal government agreed , along with all the other provincial and legal administrations , at a justice ministers ' conference , to set up such a screening system . 
all the ministers agreed on that initiative . 
it is a compromise , a proposal that does not go to one extreme or the other , but that is deemed to be a balanced and achievable approach . 
in response to legitimate concerns expressed by some members of the committee and certain associations who feared that the bill would jeopardize the aims of the pardon granting process , I would point out that the bill provides for only one exception to the intended benefits of pardons . 
it provides for a very targeted system of notation , which contains measures to protect the rights of the individual pardoned . 
i would now like to address the matter of regulations - which , in passing , were at the heart of the work of the Legal Affairs Committee - as they concern the application of the provision to permit the marking of a criminal record . 
as you know , this point is of the highest concern to me . 
currently , clause 8 of the bill provides for the amendment of section 9.1 of the Criminal Records Act so this new provision on the marking of the records of individuals pardoned following a conviction for a sexual offence may be properly applied . 
under Bill C - 7 - the bill before us , as was the case in Bill C - 69 - the government may make regulations , first , listing the offences covered by the term " of a sexual nature " ; second , respecting the making of notations in the respect of records of conviction , and the verification of such records ; third , defining the expressions " children " and " vulnerable persons " ; and , fourth , respecting the consent given by the individual concerned in the new section 6.3 to the verification of records or the disclosure of information in them to the organization requesting it and setting out in the regulations the factors the Solicitor General takes into consideration in deciding to approve or deny disclosure of the content of the record of a pardoned individual . 
when the Solicitor General appeared before the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , on June 14 , I stated that the regulatory powers , as defined by Bill C - 69 , were a matter of policy . 
in this regard , I put a number of questions to him . 
why does the Governor in Council have sole authority over the process as set out in proposed section 6.3 respecting the consent given by individuals to the verification of records or the disclosure of information contained therein to a requesting body ? 
why did the bill not mention that it was solely concerned with individuals convicted of sexual offences ? 
although all the speeches made by the government in the other place and in the Senate have always referred to sexual offences , the bill made no specific reference to the sexual nature of these offences . 
why did the bill not contain a schedule listing sexual offences , when other federal legislation , such as the DNA Identification Act , contains a schedule clearly identifying offences with which the bill is concerned ? 
honourable senators , when I spoke on Bill C - 69 last June , during debate at second reading , I said that the powers given to the Governor in Council seemed to be very broad . 
when the Solicitor General appeared before our committee , I mentioned to him that these matters could be resolved by having them included in the bill . 
note , honourable senators , that , in recent years , both the current and the previous governments have been trying to ensure that bills do not contain legal definitions or operational procedures that could be challenged or amended when examined by members of Parliament , the standing committees of both Houses , or interest groups . 
this , I am sure you will agree , is very worrisome , because there is a big difference between the process of consultation when a bill is being considered and the examination of new regulations . 
in the case of the definition of the terms " children " or " vulnerable persons " , officials of the Department of the Solicitor General answered our concerns as follows : 
in the case of " vulnerable persons " , the definition was not included in the bill because it could change over the years . 
it would therefore have been difficult to define this term in the legislation on criminal records . 
in this case , it was preferable for the ministers to be able to change the definition by regulations , without having to introduce a new bill . 
nevertheless , I reminded the minister and his departmental officials that part of the Quebec Civil Code deals at length and most precisely with the vulnerable and protection of their civil rights . 
as for the use of the term " children " , the departmental officials indicated that this was already defined in other legislation and there was therefore no necessity of including it in Bill C - 69 . 
yet the new legislation on the youth justice system that we will be looking at in coming months contains a definition of " children " . 
contrary to what the minister and his staff have stated , I am convinced that this definition will not be changing very often . 
what is more , these same departmental officials stated , in justification of these lapses , that the department had followed the same approach in the amendments to the appendixes of the Corrections and Conditional Releases Act . 
at the present time , these contain a number of legal and regulatory definitions that are modified by Order - in - Council . 
honourable senators , I would mention that a number of members of the committee , including myself , pointed out to the minister that even if clause 8 of Bill C - 69 , which refers to regulatory powers , indicated that the offences selected for inclusion in the list would be of a sexual nature , the bill did not indicate it applied only those individuals who had been sentenced for a sexual offence . 
in a number of places in the bill , only the word " offence " is used . 
accordingly , this list could include a series of infractions that would not be specifically of a sexual nature , therefore increasing the scope of the provisions of Bill C - 69 . 
that is too vague and too broad . 
departmental officials said that the list already existed . 
it had been drafted in cooperation with the provinces so as to decide what should be included in a list containing sexual offences against children and vulnerable groups in particular . 
if it already exists , why not include it in the bill ? 
that would have given us the opportunity to study it immediately . 
consequently , the list of offences that will form the basis of this new legislation may be much too vague and could greatly exceed the intent of the lawmakers . 
criminal law is fundamental in nature . 
a crime is a crime . 
in that sense , it does not seem appropriate to leave these decisions to the executive branch , rather than to the legislative branch . 
moreover , one cannot deny the principle which provides that all our laws must be in agreement with the provisions of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
finally , as regards the issue of consent , departmental officials admitted that they did not deem necessary to include in the act the consent process provided for in clause 6.3 of the bill . 
yet this process is specifically included in several other federal acts . 
honourable senators , in an attempt to reassure committee members , the minister cited practical reasons for including all these regulatory powers in the bill . 
in his view , some of these changes may take an extremely long time , particularly if they are subject to extensive parliamentary review . 
in the case before us , the government may find itself in a situation that some would describe as urgent and will not be able to proceed as quickly as it would like if , for instance , the definition of " children " or " vulnerable persons " , or the consent procedure must be amended quickly for practical or legal reasons . 
honourable senators , as I said , it is true that action to protect children and vulnerable persons from sexual predators is urgently required . 
that is no reason , however , to abrogate the powers of Parliament and to ignore the provisions of our Charter . 
this is why certain members of the committee and I did not agree with the explanations and reasoning of the minister and his officials . 
given the extent of the committee members ' criticisms - this is a story with a happy ending , as you know - the Solicitor General made a commitment to reassess the contents of the bill over the summer . 
it seemed to me that quick passage was more important . 
on September 9 , officials in the Department of the Solicitor General provided committee members with some amendments to remedy the flaws in Bill C - 69 . 
as well , the bill will specify that the system of marking records will apply only to those persons who have been convicted of sexual offences . 
in order to clarify the process , a list of offences was added as a schedule to the act . 
i presume honourable senators will realize I am referring to Bill C - 69 . 
it can , however , be amended by Order - in - Council . 
finally , the definitions of " children " and " vulnerable persons " have been moved from the regulations to the bill itself . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , I wish to state that once again , thanks to the vigilance of the members of your Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee , marked improvements were made to Bill C - 69 , and I sincerely hope to Bill C - 7 , so that the rights of the rehabilitated individuals and those of children and vulnerable persons are properly protected . 
at the very end of my remarks , I wish to indicate my support for the principles of this bill . 
it will be examined thoroughly in committee . 
i trust that the government will reintroduce the amendments it had agreed to accept for Bill C - 69 . 
once again , we shall be most vigilant on your behalf , honourable senators . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other Senator wishes to speak , I shall proceed with the motion . 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Fraser , seconded by the Honourable Senator Gill , moved that the bill be read a second time . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Fraser , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
[ earlier ] 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of His Royal Highness Samdech Krom Khun Norodom Sirivudh , Deputy Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I bid you welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
leave having been given to revert to Notices of Motions : 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 18 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill C - 69 , An Act to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee for its present study of Bill C - 7 . 
[ earlier ] 
visitors in Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I call your attention to the presence in our gallery of a delegation of chiefs and other members of the Montagnais of Lac - Saint - Jean and Quebec ' s North Shore , the special guests of the Honourable Senator Gill . 
on behalf of all senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
leave having been given to proceed to Motion No. 9 : 
hon. John B . Stewart , pursuant to notice of November 16 , 1999 , moved : 
that , notwithstanding the Order of the Senate adopted on Thursday , October 14 , 1999 , the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs which was authorized to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada : 1 . of the changed mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and Canada ' s role in NATO since the demise of the Warsaw Pact , the end of the Cold War and the recent addition to membership in NATO of Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic ; and 2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member , be empowered to present its final report no later than December 15 , 1999 ; 
that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
motion agreed to . 
business OF THE SENATE 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
we received a notice of motion from Senator Fraser a few moments ago . 
on our Order Paper for today is a similar motion made by Senator Oliver . 
there appears to be some confusion as to the appropriateness of a motion requesting authority to apply papers and evidence received by a Senate standing committee in a previous session of Parliament to a committee of the same name established in a new session and dealing with the same subject . 
there seems to be some confusion as to the rules . 
could we have clarification on that point to obviate any misunderstanding ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i thank the Honourable Senator Kinsella for mentioning this matter . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will simply say that this may be a timely request for a ruling , although I should mention that the reason the matter has arisen is as a result of concerns expressed by Senator Cools . 
perhaps I should let her speak for herself rather than try to sum up . 
suffice it to say that I concur with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in that it would be timely to have this matter resolved by His Honour . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I would be quite happy to add my remarks to the debate . 
first , perhaps I could receive some clarification . 
is this a point of order ? 
what is the question before us ? 
senator Hays : 
it is a request for a ruling from the Speaker as to the orderliness of the motion , notice of which was given by Senator Fraser . 
senator Cools : 
is Senator Kinsella asking about the propriety of the notice of motion put forth by Senator Fraser ? 
that sounds odd to me . 
senator Kinsella : 
No. Senator Fraser has duly given a notice of motion , the substance of which we have apprehended . 
a similar motion was made by Senator Oliver last week . 
that motion legitimately raised questions from some senators , including Senator Cools . 
there are at least two schools of thought as to whether , after prorogation , the work done by a committee of the Senate on a subject matter in a given session , can be referred to the new committee . 
i believe we should have this matter clarified . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I plan to bring some clarification to this matter tomorrow when I speak in debate on Senator Fraser ' s motion , but if senators wish , I am prepared to debate it now . 
i am attempting to ascertain under what authority I am answering Senator Kinsella ' s questions . 
i am prepared to speak to the matter . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , we are anticipating the question . 
all we have , insofar as Senator Fraser is concerned , is a notice of motion . 
there is no debate on a notice of motion or , indeed , an opportunity to actually raise a point of order . 
the proper time to raise the matter is when the motion is placed before us . 
however , I am in the hands of honourable senators . 
if you wish me to deal with it now , I can , but I think it would be more orderly if we proceeded when we reach the actual item on the Order Paper . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , I raised a point of order relating to the substance of Senator Fraser ' s notice of motion . 
it is similar in substance to a motion on the Order Paper made by Senator Oliver . 
given that the rules lay the awesome responsibility on the Speaker to interpret our rules , I sought clarification . 
i have risen on a point of order requesting clarification because I believe we need clarification of the rules from time to time . 
i am rising , not to debate the notice , but rather to raise a point of order at the appropriate time , which is now . 
senator Hays : 
another option is to dealt with it when Senator Oliver ' s motion is called on the Order Paper . 
in any event , I feel it would be good to deal with it today , in the light of you the Speaker ' s anticipated absence . 
however , Senator Cools raised a concern about the form of the motion , and I believe she should give her comments . 
senator Cools : 
that is agreeable . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I believe that we are anticipating at this point . 
insofar as Senator Fraser is concerned , all that is before us is a notice of motion . 
in other words , the matter is not before us . 
in my view , a notice of motion cannot be the subject of a point of order or that type of discussion . 
we have been told that eventually the senator will propose something . 
when she does , it would be the proper time to raise the matter . 
if it is the wish of honourable senators , of course , we can proceed now . 
i am in your hands in that regard . 
honourable senators , I repeat that I think the more orderly way to do our business is to proceed when the items are before us . 
if it is to be Senator Cools ' adjournment of Senator Oliver ' s motion , we will deal with it and then deal with the motion of Senator Fraser . 
however , I am in your hands . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , if the Speaker has a sensitivity to dealing with this issue as an abstract matter now , perhaps we could deal with it today when we come to Senator Oliver ' s motion . 
i point out that Senator Oliver ' s motion , which is quite properly before us , standing adjourned in the name of Senator Cools , is exactly the same in substance as Senator Fraser ' s notice of motion . 
perhaps we can deal with it when Senator Oliver ' s motion is called . 
if that is in order , it would be my suggestion that we do so . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the notice of motion and the motion are similar in that they speak to the same principle . 
they differ in that they deal with different items . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , perhaps we could deal with the questions and the complexities raised in the instance of Senator Oliver ' s motion by proposing an amendment to it . 
i am in the hands of the Senate . 
if it is the will of senators that we try to resolve these issues today , that is fine with me . 
however , I am of the opinion that this is not so much a point of order as it is a substantive question . 
if it is a substantive question , it may be better dealt with under the rubric of the government ' s notice of motion , which was Senator Fraser ' s notice of motion . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , we will be dealing with it when we come to Senator Oliver ' s motion . 
perhaps it would be appropriate to speak to it at that time to be certain that we are in order in terms of our comments . 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of November 16 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be authorized to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 , with the exception of Parliament Vote 10 a and Privy Council Vote 25 a . 
motion agreed to . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
privy Council Vote 25 a Referred to Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of November 16 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Privy Council Vote 25 a of the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
motion agreed to . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
vote 10 a Referred to Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , pursuant to notice of November 16 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in Parliament Vote 10 a of the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that a Message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House accordingly . 
motion agreed to . 
criminal Code Corrections and Conditional Release Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I rise to move second reading of Bill C - 247 and to begin the debate on this bill . 
currently , multiple murderers can receive no incremental sentences , not one day , not one hour , for the second , third or even the eleventh life taken in the brutal murders that they have committed . 
bill C - 247 challenges the notion that multiple murderers should be guaranteed a chance for parole after serving 10 or 25 years of their life sentences , regardless of the number of murders they have committed . 
Albina Guarnieri ' s bill will remove that guarantee and will give the judges the opportunity to pass sentences that are proportionate to the crimes . 
it will give judges the full flexibility to add just one day or one year , up to an additional 25 years . 
the only murderers who will ever face this possibility would be murderers convicted of multiple murders . 
bill C - 247 was Bill C - 251 in the last session of Parliament . 
bill C - 251 was received here in the Senate on June 8 , 1999 , in the dying days of the session . 
consequently , Bill C - 251 died on our Order Paper . 
on October 19 , in the House of Commons , Albina Guarnieri introduced her Bill C - 247 , renumbered from Bill C - 251 . 
bill C - 247 received first reading in the Senate on November 2 . 
honourable senators , this bill ' s journey through the Commons has been a four - year journey , in four numbered incarnations , being Bill C - 274 and Bill C - 321 in 1996 , then Bill C - 251 in 1997 , and now Bill C - 247 . 
its journey tells of the relevance of the opinion of the House of Commons to the cabinet and to the responsible minister . 
bill C - 247 is a private members ' bill developed , advanced and sponsored in the House of Commons by Albina Guarnieri , the Liberal Member of Parliament from Mississauga East , near Toronto . 
this bill responds to a major and pressing social issue - the condition of criminal justice in Canada . 
Albina Guarnieri has asked me to sponsor her bill here and to shepherd it through the Senate . 
i hold her in high esteem . 
she has endeavoured tenaciously to bring this bill forward in the face of many deliberately placed hurdles . 
all Canadians are indebted to her . 
i have supported her in these efforts , particularly in the difficult business of enduring the brutal blows that are meted out within one ' s own political party caucus , an area of human relations in need of serious introspection . 
honourable senators , Albina Guarnieri and I together attended the section 745 hearing of inmate Clifford Olson in Surrey , British Columbia , on August 18 , 1997 . 
there were no arrangements made by the Attorney General or the courts for members of Parliament to observe this hearing . 
liberal House of Commons members Dan McTeague and Paul Steckle also attended , as did John Nunziata , a former Liberal member and now an independent , as did several Reform Party members . 
Christie Blatchford aptly described that hearing . 
in her Toronto Sun article of August 19 , 1997 , entitled , " Clifford Olson ' s ` macabre circus ' " , she wrote : 
liberal Sen . Anne Cools was so outraged she was almost incoherent , mumbling that the " macabre circus " inside the court was so malevolent she had to do something fast to get her blood sugar up or she couldn ' t listen any more . 
honourable senators , on December 1 , 1998 , during her testimony before the Commons Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights on Bill C - 251 , now Bill C - 247 , Albina Guarnieri described that day ' s section 745 hearing , presided over by the British Columbia Supreme Court Justice Richard Low , with an insight of inmate Olson . 
she said : 
for me , the most alarming moment in the Olson hearing occurred when Olson read out a letter from his lawyer advising him to admit to all his murders at once . 
this way , the lawyer indicated , Olson could take full advantage of concurrent sentencing . 
inmate Olson said that his lawyer advised him to take full advantage of concurrent sentencing . 
Albina Guarnieri continued : 
Olson mocked in the court , " They can ' t do nothing . 
they can only give me a concurrent sentence . " 
just to give you a little taste of the other advice coming from Olson ' s esteemed member of the bar , Olson quoted a letter to him from his lawyer that said : 
let ' s plan a program , of which the first thing is to see that you are thoroughly protected from repercussions by overzealous boy - scout policemen . 
concurrent sentencing is advantageous for malevolent first - and second - degree multiple murderers . 
Albina Guarnieri has placed this burning public policy issue of criminal sentencing squarely before us , particularly the sentencing of cruel , wilful , incorrigible and malevolent multiple first - and second - degree murderers . 
this is sentencing for truly evil acts . 
" evil " is a word rarely used because its use demands a definition of " good " and of the source of " good " . 
further , these words " good " and " evil " compel a moral debate and a debate on the notion of a transcendent being , a deity , God as a source of all goodness . 
in today ' s public square , public policy development and debate on these questions are devoid of moral conviction , resulting in what some have called " the naked public square . " 
many current political leaders have sought to divorce politics from morality and to divorce public office from personal conviction , claiming that they do so in the name of moral neutrality . 
public and political debate in Parliament , in the public square , in the absence of principles and moral convictions , is a hollow and a failed debate . 
debate in the public square and in Parliament absolutely requires that the participants bring their moral and ethical convictions to the debate , and that debate must include moral grounds . 
honourable senators , in recent times , many have declined to admit to the existence of human evil and that it has few explanations and theories . 
the very few explanations of evil that have been developed are theological . 
yet , theological explanations are dismissed today in the name of moral neutrality . 
however , those who work in prison services , in policing , in prosecution and criminal law , and in human services - also in politics and political relations - understand that human evil exists . 
it does exist . 
they know also that human evil will damage anyone who comes too near . 
the nature and character of evil is to damage , hurt and impair good . 
the Hope for Healing Human Evil . 
about evil , which rightfully frightens most people , Dr. Peck wrote at page 42 : 
it is a reflection of the enormous mystery of the subject that we do not have a generally accepted definition of evil . 
yet in our hearts I think we all have some understanding of its nature . 
this learned psychiatrist informs us that there is no generally accepted definition of evil and of the enormous mystery and deficit in our comprehension of human evil . 
Dr. Peck also wrote at page 46 : 
suffice it to acknowledge that although we do not yet have a body of scientific knowledge about human evil worthy of being dignified by the term ` psychology ' , behavioral scientists have laid a foundation that makes the development of such a psychology possible . 
Freud ' s discovery of the unconscious and Jung ' s concept of the Shadow are both basic . 
understanding our deficit in the knowledge of evil , he upheld Dr. Eric Fromm ' s attempt to study it . 
Dr. Peck added at page 47 : 
my own experience , however , is that evil human beings are quite common and usually appear quite ordinary to the superficial observer . 
honourable senators will recall that many commentators reported on how normal and ordinary Paul Bernardo and his wife Karla Homolka looked and seemed . 
honourable senators , the Clifford Olsons and the Karla Homolkas are not ill , mentally or physically . 
they are just bad . 
all can agree that the wilful , deliberate , cold - blooded , repeated taking of lives of other human beings is evil . 
the repeated acts of wilful , cold - blooded murders of humans , especially vulnerable , defenceless children , in brutal ways , in brutal acts of disordered sexual impulses , in paraphilias , and disordered sexual gratification , is evil . 
such evil is not amenable to treatment or cure . 
further , the current concept of mental illness and mental disease fails to explain and respond to evil because these offenders are not in a state of sickness or disease . 
the word " disease " means " dis " " ease " - without ease . 
they are not " dis " " eased " with their behaviour ; they are quite at ease with it . 
inmate Olson is quite at ease with his condition . 
he signs his letters " Clifford Robert Olson , SERIAL KILLER of 11 Children . " 
i received a letter from him signed in that manner . 
i raised a question of privilege here in the Senate on April 23 , 1996 , under rule 43 ( 1 ) in respect of this letter . 
the Speaker of the Senate ruled that there was no prima facie case of breach of privilege . 
inmate Olson is not ill and he is not sick - he is bad . 
it appears that ministers and departments are content that Parliament be shut out of policy development on this crucial issue . 
this fact was made clear to me when my own two separate Senate initiatives , my bills about inmate Karla Homolka and the questionable plea agreements , were arrested summarily and withdrawn from Parliament ' s consideration . 
when reintroduced in 1997 , renumbered as Bill S - 16 , an act concerning one Karla Homolka , the Speaker again ordered it struck off the Order Paper . 
in the second instance , in 1996 , on Bill S - 3 , an act to amend the Criminal Code ( plea bargaining ) , my bill on plea bargaining was arrested without , in my opinion , proper and sufficient committee study , without proper debate and without hearing a single public witness . 
the only witnesses heard by the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee on Bill S - 3 other than myself were Department of Justice officials , Mr. Yvan Roy and Mr. Fred Bobiasz , counsel in the Criminal Law Policy Section . 
they basically told the committee to defeat the bill . 
my opponents were unwilling to have any debate or study whatsoever . 
they could have amended the bill or even defeated my parliamentary measure after robust study and debate . 
honourable senators , at inmate Olson ' s section 745 hearing in Surrey , British Columbia , I learned that the same Mr. Yvan Roy of the Department of Justice was on site , providing helpful assistance to the media . 
Christie Blatchford , as already cited , noted the presence of these government persons in Surrey . 
she wrote : 
... the folks from justice had gathered to provide ` information ' about the controversial section . 
she reported that those folks were Irene Arsenault , Manager , Media Relations , Public Affairs Division of the Department of Justice ; Fraser Simons , Regional Director of the National Parole Board , Abbotsford Region ; and , in Blatchford ' s own words , " the wheel " Yvan Roy . 
as you will recall , the engineers of the Homolka plea - bargain agreement were Ontario ' s Deputy Attorney General , George Thomson and his Assistant Deputy , Michael Code . 
i further note that , when my Homolka bills were before the Senate , that same George Thomson had become Deputy Minister of Justice to Minister of Justice Allan Rock here in Ottawa and , simultaneously , had become Mr. Roy ' s - " the wheel ' s " - boss . 
honourable senators , in Canada , parliamentary opinion on the administration of criminal justice is unwanted , particularly on the subject of punishment and sentencing . 
bill C - 247 is an unwanted parliamentary opinion that passed the Commons by majority vote , despite the fact that it was unwanted by the Minister of Justice . 
clearly , the minister ' s desired opinion was not the opinion of the majority of the Commons . 
observers are watching to learn if the Minister of Justice ' s opinion will prevail here in the Senate . 
Albina Guarnieri asked us to consider this important question related to criminal justice , that is , the sentencing and punishment of malevolent murderers . 
her real question is the value , the actual worth , of a single human life in the sentence of the murderer who has taken the lives of those for which he or she is being sentenced . 
on December 1 , 1998 , Albina Guarnieri told the Commons Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights that : 
Canadians never voted for concurrent sentencing . 
they were never asked if their identity , their Canadian identity , depended on having a more lenient sentencing system that includes volume discounts for rapists and murderers . 
concurrent sentencing is foreign to the basic concept of justice . 
the fact is , Canadians believe every act of murder or sexual assault , every victim , should matter in the sentencing equation . 
in giving the committee the results of a poll that she herself had commissioned , one conducted by Liberal Party pollster POLLARA , she continued : 
that is why 90 % of Canadians support changing the law to ensure that people convicted of several murders or sexual assaults serve consecutive sentences for each offence . 
that is the result of a national survey by POLLARA , conducted just last month . 
it also found that a mere 8 % of Canadians support the status quo . 
our political and parliamentary condition is made manifest when members , who are representatives , must use pollsters rather than reasoned debate to convince the political masters of the body public opinion . 
Albina Guarnieri continued to explain her bill as follows : 
if all victims , after the first victim of a sex offender or a murderer , are disregarded through concurrent sentencing , this principle is compromised . 
the intent of my bill is to require that there be a consequence for each violation of the law . 
consecutive terms of parole ineligibility for multiple first - and second - degree murders and a consecutive sentence for each sexual assault would result in proportional justice that is closer to the fair and balanced justice system Canadians want . 
honourable senators , Bill C - 247 builds legislatively on the government ' s ground in the government ' s own Criminal Code section 745 , even as amended in 1996 by Bill C - 45 , to amend the Criminal Code ( judicial review of parole ineligibility ) . 
as we know , life imprisonment is the minimum sentence for first and second - degree murders . 
this was the 1976 political compromise to obtain agreement for the abolition of capital punishment . 
life as a minimum sentence for first and second - degree murders was enacted with a fixed quantum of that imprisonment that the offender actually must serve in the penitentiary before eligibility to apply for parole . 
for first - degree murder , the parole eligibility date was setat the completion of 25 years of imprisonment , and for second - degree murder , at the completion of 10 years . 
honourable senators , the life sentence for first - degree murder and the 25 years of imprisonment actually served before eligibility for parole is frequently confounded in the public mind . 
a sentence of life imprisonment means precisely that - a sentence of imprisonment for life . 
the length of the inmate ' s warrant is that of his natural life . 
the inmate ' s warrant of sentence expires on the day the inmate dies . 
the terminology used by Corrections Canada is " warrant expiry date " , abbreviated as WED . 
their sentence is life imprisonment . 
there is much confusion about this . 
many believe that the sentence of life imprisonment means 25 years and not life . 
parole is that system of royal mercy , or royal clemency , that allows a sentenced prisoner to continue to serve his sentence outside the prison walls within the community . 
another form of royal mercy was the commutation of death sentence to life imprisonment . 
that was statutorily achieved administratively in the 1976 political compromise to abolish capital punishment , but it is now compromised by developments in the sentencing process which compromise justice itself . 
the reality is that the 25 years to parole eligibility date has now become the real and practical sentence for murderers and multiple murderers . 
in 1996 , the government ' s Bill C - 45 amended this section 745 to disallow multiple murderers from applying for judicial review of their parole ineligibility date . 
by this , the government accepted a large part of Albina Guarnieri ' s reasoning , admitting that multiple murderers must serve longer sentences prior to their parole eligibility date . 
honourable senators , I had questioned the very existence of section 745 and proposed that it be repealed because of its obvious insufficiencies in my 1996 Bill S - 6 , to amend the Criminal Code ( period of ineligibility for parole ) . 
about Bill C - 45 , I had asserted that it was an amendment to an already flawed section 745 . 
in debate on December 12 , 1996 , I said : 
honourable senators , in 1976 , section 745 of the Criminal Code granted the courts unusual powers to review the sentences of upper courts - powers normally reserved to courts of appeal , to clemency agencies , or to governor generals themselves . 
it granted courts the unusual powers to alter sentences imposed by the sentencing courts . 
this is something reserved for the courts of appeal and for the clemency authorities . 
section 745 took the unusual step of conferring the power of clemency upon the courts . Such 
powers of clemency rightfully belong with the clemency granting agencies . 
bill C - 45 will grant these powers to chief justices which will diminish the powers of Parliament to respond to the will of the people . 
it will , in turn , enhance the powers of the chief justices . 
as we know , constitutionally , these powers do not properly belong with the chief justices or the courts because they are political powers . 
these are powers exercised by the representatives of the body politic . 
her Majesty ' s clemency and mercy powers are not the proper business of the courts or of judges but , rather , are matters for the executive . 
they are executive powers . 
honourable senators , to create her bill for consecutive sentencing , Albina Guarnieri built on the very same ground created by the government in section 745 , which granted judges the jurisdiction to determine parole eligibility dates . 
for multiple malevolent murderers , Bill C - 247 enacts that on sentencing for additional murders , judges may expand the parole ineligibility period by adding years to be served before parole eligibility dates , but limits these additional years to a maximum of 25 additional years . 
Alternately stated , it limits judges ' powers in sentencing to a total of 50 years imprisonment before the inmate ' s eligibility for parole date . 
section 745 was a 1976 political solution resulting from a 1976 compromise . 
new solutions are required , and the absence of new solutions for the virulent psychopathies will fuel the public ' s lack of confidence in the system and fuel the public clamour for a return to capital punishment . 
bill C - 247 is a year 2000 compromise , resulting from the current practices and insufficiencies in section 745 , and in sentencing malevolent offenders in general . 
honourable senators , the reality of homicidal psychopathies and psychopathologies is that psychopaths and sociopaths are more devious , cunning and more ingenious and resourceful than the authorities . 
the cases of inmate Olson and inmate Homolka make that abundantly clear . 
the fact that inmate Homolka is going back to court to sue the government proves my point . 
honourable senators , criminal justice , its processes of prosecution , plea agreement , sentencing and parole are compelling Parliament ' s review . 
at inmate Olson ' s section 745 hearing , I witnessed this colossal caricature of justice . 
the presiding judge presided over a political hearing . 
that hearing was a political one , not a legal one . 
the judge and jury and everyone present in that room knew this . 
we do judges and judicial independence a terrible disservice to engage judges this way . 
i have no doubt that the majority of Canadians could see inmate Olson drawn , quartered , pilloried and beheaded without flinching , because his crimes were and are so repugnant to our own sense of humanity , but we do not believe in capital punishment . 
that is why we are where we are today . 
inmate Olson has cost this country billions of dollars with his many legal frolics , lawsuits , and so - called legal battles , including his section 745 hearing . 
sadly , the one good purpose that his notoriety has served is to keep him behind bars . 
i can tell you that no one will let him out . 
his most natural equivalent is Karla Homolka . 
honourable senators , I served as a member on the National Parole Board . 
i studied many files , autopsy reports , police reports , judgments and judges ' sentencing statements . 
i interviewed many inmates and granted and revoked many paroles . 
i learned that the wilful homicidal impulse of such offenders , accompanied by their predatory instincts , executed by their characteristic for deceit is very rare , but it is more common than either we think or we care to admit . 
these predators ' ability to choose victims by attaching and exploiting their victims ' vulnerability is diabolical . 
little is said in these chambers about paraphilias and psychopathy , psychopaths , sociopaths , character disorders and evil . 
the disordered erotic , homicidal impulses of the Homolkas and the Olsons and their consequence for justice need debate . 
their lack of human pity , their calculated deception , their disordered sexual lusts , their aggression , and their total narcissism and corrupted self - extravagance is beyond the comprehension of most of us . 
however , their ability and their success in manipulating people and systems , particularly democratic systems , and their reliance on people ' s disbelief and naivete is needing our study . 
three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality and Other Works , Volume 7 , Dr. Sigmund Freud wrote about disordered sexual impulses . 
he said , at page 111 , 1979 Penguin edition , that : 
the absence of the barrier of pity brings with it a danger that the connection between the cruel and the erotogenic instincts , thus established in childhood , may prove unbreakable in later life . 
we are talking now about malevolent sexual deviants here . 
we are talking about sentencing for crimes and murders actuated by cruel , incorrigible , homicidal , erotogenic impulses . 
honourable senators , the exercise of the sovereign power in the punishment of crime is one of the essential aspects of the administration of justice . 
he wrote , at page 48 : 
the right to punish , therefore , is an aspect of the sovereign ' s right to make war on his enemies : to punish belongs to ` that absolute power of life and death which Roman law calls merum imperium , a right by virtue of which the prince sees that his law is respected by ordering the punishment of crime .... But 
punishment is also a way of exacting retribution that is both personal and public , since the physico - political force of the sovereign is in a sense present in the law ' : ... 
honourable senators , I repeat , retribution . 
in our system , the language we use is the royal prerogative in justice . 
the Queen ' s presence in the law , as in the lexicon Regina v. Homolka , proves clearly the right of every citizen to justice from the Queen , the fount of justice . 
it proves the right to justice of both the accuser , the Queen , and the victims , like little Leslie Mahaffy and little Kristen French , mere children . 
punishment and sentencing for crimes stand on the principles that are described as deterrence , incapacitation , rehabilitation , and retribution . 
retribution , as distinct from vengeance , is the just result of the offender ' s own injury offered by that offender against the Queen ' s peace and against the persons who are the Queen ' s subjects and , in the cases mentioned , all children . 
retribution of the Queen ' s justice can always be tempered by the Queen ' s mercy . 
Nova Scotia Court of Appeal Justice MacKeigan articulates the case for consecutive sentencing most soundly . 
in his 1975 judgment in R . v. Muise , he wrote at page 443 : 
that belief , to which I still adhere despite the very able argument of counsel for Muise , flows from my conviction that the law , in conferring the power and imposing the duty on a Judge of sentencing a convicted person to a term of imprisonment , should not be construed as forcing the Judge in any case to make a term of imprisonment on a second offence concurrent with the term imposed by him or some other Judge for another offence . 
a so - called concurrent sentence does not sentence the convicted person to a term of any imprisonment at all since it does not require him to serve a single day of imprisonment ; a person cannot serve in jail the same day twice any more than he can be successfully hanged twice . 
a Judge in imposing a concurrent sentence is therefore not carrying out his duty unless he can find in the Code or the general criminal law authority so to do . 
i ask all honourable senators to give Bill C - 247 appropriate consideration and study . 
i want to make it clear that , in this instance , we are speaking about malevolent , multiple murderers . 
we are not talking about the poor young fellow who is in a state of upset or anger with parents and who manages to find himself involved in an armed robbery . 
we are not talking about the traditional juvenile delinquent here . 
we are talking about people who set out very cold - bloodedly to take life and do so wilfully with premeditation and cruelty . 
clearly it is time for the system and for us in this chamber to come to terms with psychopathy . 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I would like to pose a question on the articulate , well - presented and carefully designed presentation about a very contentious and difficult bill . 
it would not be appropriate for me in this environment to say Senator Cools could have done a one - woman play - she could have - but I do suggest that the issue is a very difficult one . 
senator Cools is a very enlightened person in this field . 
senator Cools : 
i thank the honourable senator for her question . 
that is the dilemma which has been posed by section 745 of the Criminal Code . 
as far as I know , most senators here are strong abolitionists who do not wish to see capital punishment ever used again as a system of punishment . 
at the time that section 745 was enacted , it was not anticipated that each and every convicted murderer would avail himself or herself of that clause . 
what has developed in point of fact is an extremely routine use of that clause and that is problematic . 
the record on this is quite clear . 
in Bill C - 45 , the government and Mr. Rock , the justice minister at the time , made some changes to section 745 to provide some limitations . 
bill C - 247 advances the position that all those changes have been insufficient and that more are required . 
i know many senators wish to speak on this bill . 
in my speech to close second - reading debate , it is my intention to bring forward the history of punishment and parole . 
i will lay out before the Senate the history of case law as it has developed in the last 20 years and how it has led to the current situation in sentencing . 
honourable Senator Finestone has hit the nail on the head . 
the issue needs our attention . 
i hope some of these issues will come out in debate . 
why do the judges not currently avail themselves of consecutive sentencing ? 
senator Finestone : 
he was very unusual . 
senator Cools : 
all murder is unusual , I submit . 
if one wanted to use the argument of unusualness , then we would need no laws against murder because murder , in and of itself , is an unusual occurrence . 
otherwise our race would be extinct . 
that is quite true . 
i have a host of information about these kinds of individuals . 
what is not that unusual among murderers are those committing murder again and again . 
that is not that unusual among that class of persons whom we would now describe as multiple murderers . 
some people , including Albina Guarnieri , believe a statute is necessary because of a need to codify the common law . 
essentially , case law over the last 20 years has developed in a direction which has not encouraged judges to impose consecutive sentences . 
if one could roll the clock back to 1980 and try the case of a murderer such as Mr. Olson , perhaps he could have had a different sentence than his present 11 concurrent sentences of life imprisonment and the case law would be different . 
we must remember the principle that a human being only has one life to serve . 
that is absolutely true . 
for example , in the United States of America sentences are imposed of 200 years or 300 years . 
we do not do that in this country . 
in the history of capital punishment there was a time when people were executed many times . 
therefore , a person could be sentenced to die for one crime by being beheaded , which was usually the path for the aristocrat . 
a person could be sentenced to die by being quartered , then dismembered , then boiled in oil . 
there used to be many , many different ways to kill the same person many times . 
in the 1790 s , when Mr. J . J . Guillotin introduced the guillotine , however barbaric it seems to us in today ' s community , it was at that time thought to be a fantastic advance in the development of punishment . 
it was deemed at the time that every human being had only one life to give ; they should die one time only . 
when Mr. Guillotin introduced his reform , he said that a human being should die once only and it should be swiftly and quickly . 
i hope I have assisted the honourable senator somewhat . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
did the Honourable Senator Cools say that Mr. Olson will never be free ? 
senator Cools : 
yes , I said something to that effect . 
senator Nolin : 
if this man will remain in jail for the rest of his life , would the honourable senator explain why the rule of law will permit this individual to remain in prison for the rest of his life ? 
senator Cools : 
this is not a question of the rule of law . 
the sentence that was imposed on Mr. Olson was the sentence of life imprisonment and the powers of the courts provide for a judicial review to review of his parole eligibility date after 15 years . 
when I said that Mr. Olson would never be free , perhaps I should not have said " never " . 
what I should have said is that , at this point in time , the entire system and every single person involved in the system with Mr. Olson is very well aware of the height of public repugnance and the depth of public feeling toward Mr. Olson . 
i am saying to honourable senators that that very strong public sentiment is a constraining factor . 
that was evident that day at the hearing in Surrey , British Columbia . 
i am here to tell honourable senators , and Senator Nolin in particular , that if the public were to stop their Olson - watch for a moment , there is a possibility that , somehow or other , the man could be released . 
i have seen many inmates of whom I have heard it said that they will kill when they leave prison . 
when I say that I heard them say these things , I mean it was in the reports that they meant to go out of prison and kill . 
i tell the honourable senator that if he ever comes face - to - face , as I have in the system , with some of these individuals , he will find them pretty scary . 
when we were studying Bill C - 45 , we had a list of section 745 inmates , some of them I saw myself when I was on the National Parole Board . 
in particular , in looking at that list , I remember the name of one inmate who had pledged to everyone around that he would go out and kill again . 
senator Nolin : 
let us be clear . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the allotted time for speeches and questions is over . 
hon. Senators : 
senator Nolin : 
honourable senators , we need to be clear now . 
if the parole board is entitled to take a decision , the board is entitled because the law gives the board the authority to do it . 
when I speak about the rule of law , that is exactly what I am speaking about . 
i am shocked that Senator Cools , as a former commissioner , was entitled to take such a decision as a commissioner . 
she is now telling us that at the time she was convinced that some of the individuals who came in front of her were future criminals , and she did not take action . 
senator Cools : 
yes , we did . 
senator Nolin : 
are they still in jail ? 
senator Cools : 
in that particular instance , I revoked his mandatory supervision absolutely . 
he was returned . 
i am speaking of years later . 
senator Nolin : 
you are proving my case . 
the law in Canada gives all the authority to the board and to different justice ministers and provinces . 
i do not think such an individual can be rehabilitated . 
what I am saying is that the laws presently in place , if properly administered , can cure such problems . 
senator Cools : 
senator Nolin : 
if it is not sufficient , does the honourable senator think that two or three consecutive sentences would cure the problem ? 
senator Cools : 
what I am saying to the honourable senator - and I think he knows quite well what I am saying to him - is that the principles of sentencing are four - fold , and any judge or jury that is looking at sentencing must balance those four principles one after the other . 
one of the principles of sentencing is incapacitation ; that is , whether the individual will be incapacitated from committing another crime . 
what I am saying to the honourable senator , who is reluctant to agree , but I shall do my best to persuade him in the next little while , although I admit it will be difficult , is that there is something needing correction . 
honourable senators , I happen to have with me a newspaper article which someone gave me a few days ago . 
i had never heard of this particular inmate before , but it is an inmate by the name of Adrian Kinkead . 
i do not have all the details , as I have not read the case so I am really at a disadvantage . 
it is just a newspaper article upon which I am relying for information . 
in this particular case , the Crown Attorney asked the judge to reserve judgment until this bill had been enacted . 
what I am saying to the Honourable Senator Nolin is that whether it is this case or another , the fact of the matter is that we are at a stage in our political development where Parliament must give these issues some attention and study . 
senator Nolin : 
the honourable senator is asking this chamber to vote at second reading on a change in principle . 
senator Cools : 
there is no change in principle . 
senator Nolin : 
that is what the honourable senator is asking . 
you need to make your case because as yet you have not done so . 
senator Cools : 
there is no change . 
senator Nolin : 
in the honourable senator ' s last answer she referred to the four principles . 
i think colleagues should be informed or remember that up until a few decades ago we were whipping rapists in Canada . 
senator Cools : 
sure , we used to execute them . 
senator Nolin : 
why have we changed that ? 
by the way , we do not call them " rapists " any more . 
senator Finestone : 
what do you call those people now ? 
senator Nolin : 
i believe they are referred to as " sexual aggressors . " 
we have evolved . 
our sentencing involves not only punishment . 
senator Cools : 
it is a bad example , but that is all right . 
senator Nolin : 
let me finish my question , please . 
i allowed the honourable senator to finish her speech . 
we are no longer in the punishment business only . 
sentencing operates on certain principles and the honourable senator must explain to this chamber , before we vote on second reading , which principle she wants changed , why she wants it changed , and how that change will affect other principles . 
if she is able to convince me , I will gladly support her in second reading . 
i do not think , as of now , from what I have heard , that the honourable senator has made her case . 
perhaps we should send the bill to committee for study before we vote on second reading because many principles are at stake here . 
the honourable senator stated that we all agree that the death penalty should no longer be available as a sentencing tool . 
why ? 
there are some reasons for that . 
senator Cools : 
i am not questioning the honourable senator ' s motives . 
i said that I wish he had been as enthusiastic when we were considering Bill C - 45 , for example . 
there is no doubt that Bill C - 247 builds particularly - and the committee is welcome to hear from witnesses such as Professors Manfredi and Knopff - on the four principles of sentencing . 
what it does , very clearly , is deal with , in a more streamlined way , the particular principle of proportionality , which is that the sentence be proportionate to the crime . 
the basis for the honourable senator ' s suggestion that this bill is not in concert with the principles of sentencing eludes me somewhat , and I will tell the honourable senator why . 
this bill has already been passed by the House of Commons and , in the course of its passage , I suspect that many people have had a look at this bill . 
this is not a Private Member ' s Bill that has just been introduced . 
this bill has had four years of examination and scrutiny in the House of Commons . 
i say to the honourable senator , very clearly , that the bill upholds and asserts the principle of deterrence , the principle of rehabilitation , the principle of incapacitation and the principle of proportionality . 
those are the principles of sentencing . 
this bill is perfectly consonant with those principles . 
in addition , this bill builds exactly politically and legally on the groundwork that the government has laid . 
the government created section 745 , which gave judges - previously unknown - the ability to set parole eligibility dates . 
this bill bill builds on that section . 
it is not only consonant with the principles of sentencing , it is quite consonant with the government policy of the last many years as developed in its legislative drafting and in its legislative development of its initiatives , particularly Bill C - 45 , the current version of that bill , and the addition of section 745 to the Criminal Code . 
senator Nolin : 
i am sure that in her study of this matter , the honourable senator is aware that one of the principles at stake is the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
i am sure the honourable senator has considered that . 
he must just trust me on that . 
i have looked at the Charter . 
senator Nolin : 
just to make it very clear , would a double life sentence mean a minimum of 50 years imprisonment ? 
senator Cools : 
that is not what the bill is proposing at all . 
perhaps the honourable senators does not understand the bill . 
senator Nolin : 
what would be the minimum life sentence ? 
senator Cools : 
the minimum would remain consistent with what is in the statute . 
whatever the law currently prescribes as the penalty , is what this bill prescribes . 
perhaps it is not clear to the honourable senator so maybe there is some hope that I can persuade him yet . 
this bill allows the judge , in the cases of multiple murder sentencing , to add an additional day , or an additional year or an additional six months or whatever , to the particular parole eligibility date . 
therefore , if an inmate is tried , convicted and sentenced to life on multiple charges of second - degree murder , the judge can sentence him to 10 years imprisonment on one murder conviction , and add two three years as a part of the quantum of life sentence that must be served in prison before the date of parole eligibility . 
the honourable senator seems to believe that this bill just adds another 25 years to the sentence . 
it does not . 
the bill limits on any sentence a judge may hand down . 
therefore , the bill gives a judge the power to add an additional year , or two or three or 10 , but limits the power of the judge to an additional total of 25 years . 
i hope the honourable senator understands it now . 
senator Nolin : 
the honourable senator must be clear for our colleagues . 
if the evidence is there to prove that a certain gentleman has killed three people on separate occasions , and in different environments , he can be sentenced to three life sentences . 
we are not talking about one , two or three years . 
senator Cools : 
yes , we are . 
senator Nolin : 
would the honourable senator explain that to me , please ? 
senator Cools : 
i would be happy to explain it to the honourable senator . 
as I said before , Albina Guarnieri has built on the legislative ground created by section 745 , which relates to judges expanding or postponing the parole eligibility date . 
that is the current regime . 
this bill will allow a judge , in the instance of another sentence , to add another five years or another two years to the parole ineligibility period . 
that aspect of the bill is quite cleverly designed because it is built on the reasoning behind the development of section 745 and the amendments to section 745 contained in Bill C - 45 . 
the reasoning is exactly the same . 
senator Nolin : 
what would be the maximum ? 
senator Cools : 
the bill then specifies , however , that the extra power being given to judges to extend that parole ineligibility date is set , eclipsed and sealed to an additional total of 25 years . 
that is the limit . 
senator Nolin : 
an addition of 25 years . 
senator Cools : 
there is no one additional 25 years . 
there is an addition to a total of 25 years . 
senator Nolin : 
you just said that . 
senator Cools : 
i did not . 
the inmate ' s sentence is still life . 
the inmate must still serve his life sentence . 
therefore , the exact powers that were given to a judge in section 745 are the same powers that Bill C - 247 is proposing , except that they are an expanded version of what is contained in section 745 . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , before adjourning the debate in the name of one of my colleagues , Senator Cools , in a most important and interesting address this afternoon , raised a number of questions . 
i must confess that my attention was drawn to her citation from Sigmund Freud providing an explanation of sociopathic character disorder . 
i am sure that many in the school of psychoanalysis , which was founded by Sigmund Freud , would develop their particular understanding of why people behave the way they do , particularly those people in the population that this legislation will address . 
it would be somewhat remiss , however , if we did not point out that there are many theories of personality . 
i would think , for example , that the individual school of psychology of Alfred Adler has as far more positive view of human personality , and that , indeed , even the school of psychoanalysis developed by Carl Gustav Jung has a more hopeful view of the human personality , including those who might clinically be diagnosed has having sociopathic character disorder . 
there is also the whole school of psychology , clinical and social , that views the human personality as very much subject to and amenable to social learning and correction . 
the point I wish to bring to the debate is that the human person , according to psychologists of many other schools , is indeed subject to correction and radical behavioural change . 
i would not want the debate to be left untested in terms of the more pessimistic view , which I think is the view developed by Sigmund Freud . 
having said that , honourable senators , I move the adjournment of the debate in the name of Senator Di Nino . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Di Nino , debate adjourned . 
committee of Selection 
consideration of Third Report - Order Withdrawn 
on the Order : 
consideration of the third report of the Committee of Selection ( Speaker pro tempore ) , presented in the Senate on November 2 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Mercier ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that this order be withdrawn from the Order Paper ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order withdrawn . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator Di Nino : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee , when and if it is formed , for its present study of Bill S - 6 . - ( 
honourable Senator Cools ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the item to which we were going to revert relates to Senator Kinsella ' s point of order on the wording of this motion 
i have already commented on this . 
senator Kinsella may wish to add a comment . 
there is a request for clarification on the orderliness of this motion , in particular the direction that papers and evidence previously received be taken as evidence before the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
i will defer to Senator Cools at this time . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , having been on my feet for the past hour , I would move that this matter be adjourned until tomorrow . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , we would not oppose the adjournment of the motion of Senator Oliver . 
however , it would be helpful if the point of order I raised could be addressed because we now have a motion from this side and a notice of motion from the other side . 
i understand that Senator Cools has been active this afternoon on another item and that His Honour will be absent later . 
however , there may be other occasions on which senators would want to have previous testimony referred to committees . 
there being two schools of thought on this , I believe that we must settle this today before His Honour leaves the chamber . 
on page 90 of the Debates of the Senate of November 3 , 1999 , Senator Oliver indicated that there are precedents . 
he said that the exact wording of his motion appeared in a motion dealing with the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
this afternoon , we had on our desks the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs relating to its study on Europe . 
on the second page of that report , the order of reference is reproduced . 
in that order of reference we find exactly the same wording , that is , that papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs during the first session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament ought to be referred to the committee . 
it is our position that the appropriate way in which we have dealt with these matters in the past ought to continue . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I will respond in order not to lose the opportunity to say a few words on this point of order . 
the fact is that Parliament prorogued some months ago and is now in session again . 
in order to give this matter proper consideration , we must study the issue of committee deliberations that were not completed before prorogation . 
i believe that Bill C - 7 is totally different from Bill S - 17 . 
we must remember that when a bill is committed to a committee , in this instance the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , the bill is precisely there . 
it is still in a state of committal . 
it was left in the committee . 
how does the Senate go about the business of referring to a committee something of which it has never had cognizance ? 
when a committee receives a reference from the Senate , the way it obeys the reference is to study the bill . 
its obedience to the reference is indicated through the committee report to the Senate . 
i happen to have with me , Senator Kinsella , a particular citation . 
we are talking about a bill that was committed , and the word is " committed " . 
Beauchesne ' s sixth edition , paragraph 874 , states clearly : 
when committees have not completed their enquiries before the end of the session , they may report this fact to the House together with any evidence which may have been taken . 
the report is proof itself that evidence has been taken . 
in their report , they may recommend that the same subject matter , with the evidence taken in that session , be referred again in the new session . 
therefore , in the instance of Bill C - 7 , which was a government bill backed by the entire machinery of government and the entire power of a party caucus here , the proper way to have proceeded at the time was for the chairman of the committee to rise in the Senate and to make a report stating that the study of the bill was incomplete and that the committee would like to position itself for the future , as we know governments want to resuscitate all important questions and material put before them . 
if we slide our eyes down from paragraph 874 to paragraph 875 , we read the following : 
a committee cannot report the evidence taken before a similar committee in a previous session , except as an appendix , unless it has received authority from the House to consider that evidence . 
the operative words here are " to consider that evidence . " 
in other words , in the instance of Senator Milne , who was chair of the committee and is a hard - working senator , the government has an interest in being able to look again at all the evidence placed before that committee and being able to expedite the business of the committee . 
senator Milne and her committee want to be able to report the evidence in this session . 
we also must be aware that , in general , any committee at any time can study and use documents and proceedings from any other committee , or even its own proceedings and evidence . 
in this instance , the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee wants to be able to report the evidence taken . 
it is in order , I believe , to come to the Senate to look for that authority because Beauchesne very clearly shows that some authority is needed from the Senate . 
the question is , authority for what ? 
to the extent that the Senate has never received a report from the committee on either of those bills , the Senate has no cognizance , or no possession of the study of those two bills . 
consequently , we do not need in this session an order from the Senate referring the evidence and testimony back to the committee because the Senate does not have possession of the evidence in order to refer it . 
what is required is for the Senate to give the committee an instruction , in the proper format , asking the committee , in its consideration of this new bill , to consider the evidence that was placed before it by witnesses on the other bill . 
what is required is an order from the Senate , an instruction , asking the committee in its deliberations to include and to consider that evidence , not for the Senate to refer what it does not have . 
honourable senators , they are two different bills , and Bill C - 7 deserves proper and sufficient procedural treatment . 
bill C - 7 was reintroduced in the House of Commons and fast - tracked . 
basically , they put down an order authorizing themselves to fast - track it and deemed it passed . 
therefore , if Senator Milne and her committee and Senator Fraser want to give Bill C - 7 due diligence and study , it appears to me to be a matter of moving ahead procedurally in an appropriate way . 
the proper way to proceed is not to ask the Senate to refer evidence it does not have , but to ask the committee to consider that evidence taken in its deliberations . 
i hope I have made that clear , but I would be happy to explain further . 
when Senator Oliver proposed his motion , which he did so with unanimous consent , I rose and asked him if it was an instruction to the committee . 
perhaps he had not read the rule , but I believe his motion was moved pursuant to rule 58 ( 1 ) . 
in response to my question , he said it was not an instruction to the committee . 
i read rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , and it states : 
for an instruction to a committee . 
therefore , the motion substantively is an instruction to the committee . 
i had intended to speak to Senator Oliver ' s motion more fully tomorrow and to suggest an amendment that could have been satisfied easily - changing the word " refer " to " consider " . 
however , that is now an academic point . 
i think it incumbent upon us as a functioning and vital part of the Parliament of Canada to pay due attention to the proper execution of proper motions . 
we are sometimes a little careless , although that is a very strong word . 
we do many things that , with very little effort , we could do much better . 
the intention of Senator Fraser ' s notice of motion is to put the subject matter before the committee fairly , squarely and properly so that the committee can give the bill the kind of study and diligence it deserves . 
honourable senators , I probably could have done better had I waited until tomorrow to address these issues , but I did not want to lose the opportunity to do so today . 
the fact of the matter is that the committee is free to study all the other witnesses ' testimony . 
the only thing it is not free to do is the item as articulated in section 875 , namely , they cannot report it except as an appendix . 
the committee has as much power as it needs . 
this was an additional requirement . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I am prepared to rule on the question . 
speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when this issue was raised originally , I went to the precedents of the Senate . 
i shall try now to deal with this matter in a logical sequence . 
however , if you go back to the Debates of the Senate for November 3 , it is clear that when Senator Oliver proposed the motion he said : 
... with leave of the Senate , and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ... 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Oliver ' s motion was quite properly before the Senate because leave had been granted . 
second , I wish to refer all honourable senators to the Rules of the Senate , Part I , " Interpretation " , which states : 
( 1 ) In all cases not provided for in these rules , the customs , usages , forms and proceedings of either House of the Parliament of Canada shall , mutatis mutandis , be followed in the Senate or in any committee thereof . 
it is clear that our rules , practices , customs , and usages take precedence over Bourinot or Beauchesne or other such references . 
we first go to our rules and then we go to our practices and precedents . 
two of our practices and precedents have been detailed by the Honourable Senator Kinsella . 
regarding the motion by the Honourable Senator Stewart earlier today , the order of reference is clear : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and the work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
as well , Senator Oliver , as indicated by Senator Kinsella , had indicated again on November 3 , in the Debates of the Senate , page 90 , that there had been a previous occasion where this was done . 
he refers to the Journals of the Senate on April 2 , 1998 , at page 584 , where papers and evidence received on Bills S - 10 and S - 12 were referred to the committee for its study of Bill S - 14 . 
i can find other precedents if honourable senators require them . 
however , my understanding is that this has been a common practice in the Senate . 
the reason for doing it is not to force witnesses to come a second time to speak on the same subject and also not to have to do all the research a second time on a matter that has already been discussed in a Senate committee or before the Senate . 
that is the reason for the past practice and that is how it has evolved . 
reference was made by Senator Cools to Beauchesne . 
as I pointed out , our practices take precedence over Beauchesne . 
however , even if you read Beauchesne , paragraph 874 , it does not say that they shall report to the House , it says that " they may report to the House . " 
in my view , that does not exclude , then , the Senate from taking another practice because there is no compulsion . 
it does not say that if this has not been done , you cannot take another practice . 
our practice has been different . 
i rule that it is in order for us to proceed with Senator Oliver ' s motion . 
do you wish the matter to remain standing in Honourable Senator Cools ' name ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it will remain standing in Honourable Senator Cools ' name , then . 
order stands in name of Senator Cools . 
conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life 
inquiry 
hon. Lorna Milne rose pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 : 
that she will call the attention of the Senate to her recent participation , respecting the 70 th anniversary of the Person ' s Case , at a conference on Women ' s Equality and Participation in Public Life in Canada and the United Kingdom on October 21 and 22 , 1999 , in London , England . 
the series was organized by Debra Davis and held in Canada House , on Trafalgar Square , to celebrate the seventieth anniversary of the ruling by the Judicial Committee of the British Privy Council that women are persons in law . 
since no Canadian senators had been invited to or even informed of this conference , I agreed that our presence was necessary . 
i travelled to London - at my own expense , I hasten to add - to represent Canadian Liberal parliamentarians at the conference . 
the conference was divided into several panels , some of which I will highlight for you . 
Nancy Ruth , whose grandfather had been the lawyer for the Famous Five , opened the conference on Thursday , October 21 , and gave us a slightly different aspect of the history of the Person ' s Case . 
in 1929 , the Ramsay MacDonald government had just been elected in Great Britain , a labour government . 
the make - up of the Privy Council Judicial Committee had changed and the timing was right for such a decision . 
the justices declared , as part of their decision , " The Constitution is like a living tree , " and so must change with the times . 
however , back in Canada , in spite of the battle that she had won , Emily Murphy was a Tory from the West and the first opening in the Senate was in Ontario . 
when the Right Honourable R . B . Bennett , a Progressive Conservative , became prime minister , there was an opening in the West , but Bennett claimed that he wanted " a Roman Catholic since the last appointee was a Protestant . " 
i think it was just an excuse not to appoint Emily . 
the next speaker was Frances Wright of Calgary . 
she is president and CEO of the Famous Five Foundation . 
she has single - handedly raised the money , with the generous help of five Canadian women , one of whom sits in the Senate , namely , Senator Poy , who is not here right now . 
she was one of the very generous donors for this wonderful statue that now stands in Calgary . 
this statue was unveiled on October 18 , the fiftieth anniversary of the Privy Council decision . 
next year another statue will be unveiled on Parliament Hill , just out here between the East Block and the Senate end of the Centre Block . 
last week , I made a brief stopover in Calgary after attending the Liberal Party of Canada in Alberta Annual General Meeting held in Edmonton . 
while in Calgary I visited this impressive new monument . 
as I sat for a moment on Emily ' s chair , a woman came running from a nearby restaurant in her shirt sleeves . 
it was Frances Wright , just keeping a friendly eye on her statues . 
she is an extremely intelligent and capable woman in her own right . 
she was very open about her opinions and also about the situation , still , of women in the professions in Britain . 
some of the non - confidential statistics that she cited are the fact that there are no women in the highest court in Great Britain , and very few women have been named Queen ' s Counsel , in spite of the fact that 25 per cent of all barristers in Great Britain are women . 
she said : 
you have all heard the story of Allerednic - 
the prince marries a princess and turns her into a scullery maid . 
this is , apparently , the true - life situation of many British women . 
the second panel was titled , " From the Periphery to the Centre : 
making Women ' s Voices Heard . " 
it was chaired by Sandra Anstey , President of Anstey Associates , of Toronto . 
she pointed out that the UN has rated Canada number one in the world for women ' s equality . 
Baroness Crawley , Chair of the Women ' s National Commission in Britain , participated in this session . 
she said : 
canada has led the way so often by being brave in leading the way for gender equality . 
in the United Kingdom , the last Labour government brought an influx of women into the House of Commons but they are still less than 20 per cent . 
however , in the new Scottish Parliament , there are 48 women MSPs out of 139 members . 
forty per cent of law students in England now are women , but the upper levels of the legal profession and the judiciary are solidly male and they have an enormous impact on U . K . life . 
the Equal Opportunities Commission is 25 years old in Great Britain . 
it is an independent statutory body with 15 commissioners and centres in London and Manchester . 
they have the power to hold formal investigations but have not done so for years . 
Dr. Barshevkin ' s subject was " The Challenge of Personhood : 
women ' s Citizenship in Contemporary Perspective . " 
she claimed that many regressive changes since the Person ' s Case have profoundly influenced the position and rights of less - advantaged women . 
the present " third - wave " leaders of the U.S. , Canada and Great Britain have not yet moved to repair this damage . 
many of the interventions and much of the discussion afterwards centred on the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and how much the British women wished they also had one . 
Susan Tanner , Senior Advisor on Gender Equality , also known as SAGE , at the Canadian Department of Justice , pointed out that the Canadian Charter is based on the collective rights of groups , not of individuals , and that fact alone has changed Canadian law and jurisprudence vastly . 
however , she admits there is still a very male environment and culture , even within the Department of Justice and certainly within the Canadian Department of Finance . 
in contrast , Lucy Makinson , a Policy Advisor in Her Majesty ' s Treasury , claimed that great strides have recently been made to address women ' s concerns within that department . 
however , the Treasury still has not " mainstreamed " women ' s issues , not when 45 per cent of British working women still work part time and women ' s wages are 80 per cent of men ' s wages for work of equal value . 
in the following debate , British Columbia ' s Rosemary Brown , now President of Match International Centre , mentioned that the Charter is a two - edged sword and there have been cases where men have used it , with their greater resources and contacts , to disadvantage women . 
she made the point that there indeed may be women political commentators now on British TV but the political editors are still solidly male . 
Trina McQueen , the Executive Vice - President of CTV , said that " the media just does not get it . " 
she cited some recent Canadian stories . 
first , Canada ' s new Governor General , Adrienne Clarkson , came under instant attack in the media about her supposed shortcomings as a mother - mainly by women columnists . 
second , the Supreme Court ruled that natives were able to fish for food at any time . 
when the CBC used the gender - sensitive language " fishers , " there were screams of outrage from a group of women fishermen . 
when the Supreme Court decided that the federal government does indeed owe their female employees back - pay for " work of equal value " , the National Post claims the Supreme Court is in the hands of radical feminists . 
Yvonne Roberts , a freelance journalist , quipped : 
the British media is a power complex - men have the power , women the complex ! 
women who achieve success and then quit to raise their children or to pursue a different career are usually attacked as not being able to " hack it . " 
the situation in Britain for both women ' s coverage in the media and their participation in it seems to be dreadful . 
during the session on " Women and the Law : 
promoting Women ' s Rights Through the Courts , " Carissima Mathen , the Director of Litigation for LEAF , talked about " Raising our Voices , " about the Canadian experiment with equality rights which has lasted for 20 years now under the Charter . 
she made the point that since judges are not elected in our British system of law , " Judges have the freedom to be politically unpopular , " and to make politically unpopular but legally correct judgments . 
Anuja Dhir , a London barrister , talked of some of the most troubling recent cases in Britain . 
first , marital rape was legal in Britain for 400 years following an infamous 1678 verdict . 
in 1991 , the verdict of a Court of Appeal overturned the fact that a husband had pled guilty in the lower court to marital rape . 
the wife then appealed to the House of Lords , much as the Famous Five did in our own history . 
a group of " Law Lords , " all men , heard the appeal and decreed that " the whole proposition of a woman being her husband ' s property was no longer applicable and was offensive to women . " 
in 1991 this happened . 
she spoke of forced marriages most movingly because this is a common custom within her own South Asian culture . 
the high court has intervened and labelled such behaviour as kidnapping and criminal behaviour . 
the third example that Ms Dhir used was that of battered women who have killed their violent spouses . 
even though this syndrome is now recognized as a valid defence here in Canada , in the U . K . the defences of self - defence or provocation still require immediate reaction to be valid . 
the battered women ' s syndrome is not recognized there . 
she argued strongly that " equality does not mean the same treatment but the same end result . " 
the end result is the only valid measure of true equality . 
in the next segment , the first speaker was the Right Honourable Baroness Jay of Paddington , Lord Privy Seal , Leader of the House of Lords and Minister for Women . 
she listed legislation that the Blair government has introduced recently including , just this month , a child tax credit to benefit women . 
a national minimum wage has been introduced . 
can you imagine ? 
for the first time ever in Britain , they now have a minimum wage , and 1.3 million women got a pay hike because of it . 
the Honourable Hedy Fry , our Secretary of State for the Status of Women , spoke next and did Canada proud . 
she reiterated Canadian statistics and how they have improved so greatly over recent years . 
she spoke eloquently of our own Employment Equity Act and of " gender - based analysis , " which is now required by Canadian law . 
she pointed out that the whole idea of " one size fits all gender - equal policy has been debunked . " 
we now measure equality by the end result here in Canada and not by a strictly equal process . 
the conference was not only very informative and educational ; it was a public relations coup for Canada . 
we got more column inches in the British press in just one article than we have received in total for over a year . 
it was written by Yvonne Roberts and it was called " Northern rights . " 
she did a follow - up piece the week after the conference and , in equal column inches , she wrote " Under a blaze of Northern rights " which again praised the Canadian record . 
it was a most remarkable conference and I am so glad that I went . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , this inquiry shall be deemed to be debated . 
federalism and Globalization 
inquiry 
hon. G é rald - A . 
Beaudoin rose pursuant to notice of Tuesday , November 2 , 1999 ; 
honourable senators , I had the privilege in October of participating in the Forum of Federations held at Mont - Tremblant and bringing together over 550 representatives and experts . 
this conference covered four major themes : federalism , citizenship and social diversity ; economic and social federalism ; intergovernmental relations in federations ; and social policy and federalism . 
more than 30 panels were established and dealt with a great number of subjects , including division of powers , globalization , intergovernmental relations , citizenship , et cetera . 
the two co - chairs , Bob Rae and Henning Voshereau , did a remarkable job and chaired more than one plenary , including one entitled New Directions in Federalism . 
the Forum of Federations will be an ongoing event . 
the next meeting is scheduled to take place in Switzerland two years hence . 
this forum cost the Canadian government $ 10,500,000 . 
in my view , there was a need for the forum . 
i had the good fortune to chair a roundtable on globalization and federal systems , and it is on this topic that I wish to speak briefly today . 
canada is one of the oldest federations in the modern era , preceded by the United States , in 1789 , and Switzerland , in 1848 . 
our Constitution has evolved considerably . 
history teaches us that we go through alternate phases of centralization and decentralization . 
right now , we are in a phase of decentralization . 
few countries have spent as much time and energy as we have on the advent of balanced federalism . 
there is a growing interest , worldwide , in federalism . 
as Professor Ronald Watts , an influential participant in the Forum of Federations , said : 
twenty - five years ago there was only one journal and two centres for research on federalism in the world . 
there are now several journals , and the International Association of Centres for Federal Studies ( IACFS ) meeting annually now , encompasses 23 centres and institutes in 15 countries on five continents . 
it is good to examine certain features of our Constitution and to ask ourselves questions about the possible consequences of globalization . 
with respect to treaties , Canada has adopted a dualist system . 
in many countries , the signing of a treaty changes the law of the land . 
in Canada , enabling legislation is also required to implement a treaty that has been signed . 
the courts have established that treaties must be signed by the federal authority . 
when it comes to implementation of a treaty , the division of legislative power between the federal and provincial governments must be observed . 
this was the decision arrived at in 1937 and it has not been varied since . 
as I see it , this division of power is a good reflection of Canada ' s needs , particularly as we have two systems of private law : the civil law of Quebec and the common law of the other provinces . 
in Canada , it is the federal authority that can legislate extraterritorially , deliver passports and manage foreign policy . 
Quebec and New Brunswick also have the status of participating government within the Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation . 
the federal government has agreed , in some cases , to allow provincial ministers to be part of Canadian delegations abroad and sometimes to act as chair or vice - chair at certain functions . 
on November 17 , 1965 , Canada and France signed a cultural agreement which allowed the provinces to directly conclude cultural agreements with France . 
under this framework agreement , a province can directly sign agreements with France . 
if such agreements exceed the scope of the framework agreement , they must be ratified by the federal government to be valid . 
a significant number of agreements between France and Quebec have been signed under this framework . 
administrative arrangements add greater flexibility to our federation . 
these arrangements do not amend the Constitution , but facilitate its implementation . 
such arrangements are necessary in a modern federation . 
an administrative agreement was signed in December 1975 by the federal government and the provinces regarding human rights . 
it defines the mechanisms for cooperation and joint action by the two levels of governments in the enforcement , in Canada , of human rights policies . 
in the context of globalization , modern federalism is rapidly moving to the forefront . 
for example , the North American Free Trade Agreement accelerated globalization on the American continent . 
trade and commerce are almost no longer restricted by borders . 
this is also true in other parts of the world , for example in Europe . 
the impact of globalization can be felt on the commercial , cultural and political levels . 
similarly , states are increasingly seeing their sovereignty eroded by larger entities such as NAFTA and the European Union . 
a federal state can facilitate its components ' participation in the globalization process while insuring a coherent foreign policy . 
a case in point in Canada is the Francophonie summits . 
there could be others . 
as professor Richard Simeon said at the Forum of Federations in Mont - Tremblant : 
no matter the point of view , it is clear that with globalization , federalism does not stop at the border : global forces have a powerful impact on relationships at the national level , and the federal nature of a nation is inevitably reflected on the international scene . 
in conclusion , I shall quote some extracts from the paper of Professor Earl H . Fry , at the Forum of Federations at Mont - Tremblant in October 1999 . 
without any doubt , more intergovernmental consultations and collaboration will be needed if federal systems are to take advantage of the many opportunities and to minimize the negative effects of globalization . 
as we enter the new century , the odds are very high that the trend toward globalization will intensify and that the interconnectedness of local , national and international economics will solidify . 
this Canadian model is perhaps a good starting point for federations to commence the process of developing or refining the intergovernmental institutions and procedures needed to cope effectively with globalization in the 21 st century . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , this will end debate on this inquiry . 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Aur é lien Gill rose pursuant to notice of Thursday , November 4 , 1999 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the situation of Aboriginal Peoples , to enable us to take stock and consider appropriate measures for the future . 
nor will it surprise you if I also share my enthusiasm and my faith . 
for a year now , I have been observing , listening and learning . 
the time has now come for me to speak up . 
my identity and my life bear witness to my principles and my convictions . 
looking back , I can see what a struggle it has been during my lifetime to merely gain recognition of who and what I am . 
i was part of that struggle , that battle , that awakening , and along this long path my principles have often been put to the test . 
i consider it my duty to make use of my position in the Senate to express my beliefs and the reasons I have lived my life the way I have . 
words carry messages , and the message must be delivered and repeated , with increasing wisdom and gravity . 
often words are all we have left . 
honourable senators will see that I take my role seriously and will continue to do so for as long as I have the opportunity to speak out in public . 
the Senate is precisely the right place to record these grave words we all bear within ourselves , words that concern us all and concern the entire nation . 
the Prime Minister of Canada , Jean Chr é tien , demonstrated his open - mindedness by appointing me to the Senate . 
the First Nations issue is one of great significance for Canada . 
its future depends on it . 
all too often we view it as an annoyance , a reminder of those little recurring nightmares we try so hard to forget . 
the heart of the matter is rarely addressed , however . 
it is timely to speak of the new millennium opening before us . 
the 20 th century has not been a good one for the Aboriginal peoples of this country . 
the 19 th century was a catastrophic one , filled with misery . 
so our first nations have been the whipping boys of history for 200 years now . 
we have been stripped of our identities . 
our lands have been despoiled . 
treaties have not been respected , we have been put under guardianship . 
we have been left forgotten in a parallel universe of dependency , paternalism , subject to perverse legislation , held prisoner on Indian reserves , subjected to all of the pressures to assimilate . 
can we hope the next century will be the century of reparation , of redress , of rebirth ? 
as I have long been in the front lines of these struggles , my opinion must have some weight . 
as a former chief of the Montagnais and Attikamek nations , as the former chief of my community of Mashteuiatsh at Pointe - Bleue , I am one of those who claim that we are out of time . 
there is urgency . 
if no basic change is soon forthcoming in our political landscape , I think things will go sour . 
for the time being , we live from crisis to crisis in the hope that each will deflate . 
for the past 20 years , it has been so : 
Kanesatake , Ipperwash , Gustafsen Lake and Burnt Church . 
it is fortunate that none really went off the rails . 
each of them could have plunged us into dramas far more unfortunate than what we have faced so far . 
i cannot remain silent on subjects of such importance , because in this case , silence makes things worse . 
we have of course made progress in the past 40 years . 
we have even reached I point we would never have imagined when I was a young man . 
no one now disputes the fact that we are the first inhabitants of this country . 
we have lived on this land , now called Canada , for millennia . 
the Canadian Constitution bears witness to our rights . 
however , while our rights are affirmed in the nation ' s founding document , the content of these rights remains a mystery to many . 
in the not so distant past , our ancestors welcomed the newcomers and helped them . 
the first part of the history of our relations is one of partnership . 
it was only later that the mood of the guest changed . 
a history that is less insulting to us , the First Nations , must be written . 
we played a major role in this history , but this role was also denied us , as was our attachment to our lands , and our contributions to survival , life and philosophy . 
it is urgent that we teach it , pass it on , in short , learn to tell it . 
let it be known that the concept of two founding nations has done the First Nations much harm . 
when it comes to constructing its national image , Canada suffers from a fundamental flaw . 
how can anything at all be based on such an oversight , such a misunderstanding ? 
we have been here from time immemorial . 
we were useful in wars , in trade , in the establishment of wealth , in alliances , in friendships , in the building of this country . 
we , the Montagnais Innu , the Cree , the Wendat , the Ojibway - Anishinabe , the Blackfoot - Siksik , the Assiniboine , the Lilioet , the Tsequoitin , the Haida and the Gitchwin , have been here from time immemorial . 
we are forced to conclude that , despite all the efforts , despite the passage of time , the great majority of Canadians are ignorant of what matters most with respect to First Nations . 
the last royal commission on this subject , the Erasmus - Dussault commission , once again pointed out dramatically that Canadians ' ignorance has political consequences . 
i would say that it has an impact on political will because , as we all know , ignorance leads to prejudice and prejudice exacerbates situations . 
this is what we hear . 
the existence and persistence of such views in the year 2000 is a sign of painful failure for all Canadians . 
the First Nations had absolutely nothing to do with the drafting , the enactment and the enforcement of the Indian Act . 
but who , in Canada , even knows that act , who knows its nature , who can assess its tragic scope , its historic impact ? 
the status of Canadian Indian is one of second - class citizenship . 
the act applies the concept of guardianship . 
this long guardianship has made children of us and history shows that we have lost everything , including our dignity . 
even though the Indian Act was revised and amended , its general spirit still remains . 
over a period of 125 years , it has created a horrible situation , a parallel world , the complex world of Indian reserves , dependency on the bureaucracy and the closed universe of Indian Affairs . 
Canadians in general , and particularly well - educated ones , are unaware of the existence of the treaties . 
much less do they know that the Canadian state and the other governments did not abide by one single treaty . 
whether people claim there were misunderstandings , whether they make all sorts of excuses , it does not change the outcome . 
we were duped on every facet of our identity , on every one of our most fundamental rights . 
but this remains a well - kept secret . 
one only has to read and to hear our most distinguished analysts and experts to realize , day after day , how much damage ignorance can create . 
Canadians have a better grasp of what is going on in East Timor than of the deteriorating situation in our country . 
canada has not always listened to the voice of its conscience regarding its treatment of First Nations . 
a serious injustice was done to those who have been called all sorts of names , including Savages , then Indians , then Amerindians , then Aboriginals , and Heaven only knows what else . 
that injustice still persists in a Canadian society that claims not to tolerate such action . 
nothing is possible without first attending to this deep wound , without ensuring that justice is done . 
as I have said , over my lifetime some progress has been made . 
unfortunately , recognition of our rights seems to play against us . 
what those rights are still seems to be a mystery . 
many balk at their recognition . 
as a people , we are perceived as a threat . 
our future has become a legal issue . 
we find ourselves caught between the narrow , if not abstract , corridor of the law and the hard , if not tortuous , reality of the prejudices of the real world . 
that has always been the history of the First Nations , promises from one side and refusals from the other . 
the day will come when we must move beyond this . 
the First Nations aspire to self - sufficiency , to responsibility , to dignity . 
to attain that , we must break free of the vicious circle of guardianship and the hell of dependency . 
Indian Affairs costs Canadian taxpayers dearly , with negative results . 
it is necessary and urgent to restore to the First Nations a place in the Canadian landscape , a political , economic and geographical place . 
we defend our rights , we defend our identity , we are fighting for our rights within the Canadian nation . 
i am both a senator and an Aboriginal person . 
i do not want to feel ashamed of my country . 
i have worked life long for the restoration of our rights , for we have the right to be Dene , Inuit , Sarcee or M é tis , and to be proud of it . 
there is a huge amount of catching up to do , but it must be done . 
in the coming years my intention here in the Senate is to continue to make my humble contribution to the value of words and of wisdom . 
my bet is on wisdom . 
i will therefore call upon all of the advice I can get in preparing my communications , for it is vital for the message to get through . 
we must all work for open - mindedness . 
in my future interventions , I intend to come back before you with more information . 
i intend to participate fully in the deliberations of the Standing Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
i am determined , from my position in the Senate and with the means at my disposal , to do everything to fuel the debate in a positive sense . 
we must raise the level of this debate , and the most pressing action involves informing the Canadian public of the real issues . 
we must together fight the devastating effects of misinformation , quick analysis and empty accusations . 
if we cannot have this debate in the Senate , who will ? 
despite all the ambient ignorance that generates so many mistruths , despite the lack of information on which many judge the situation , the situation of the Aboriginal peoples remains desperate . 
try telling the Algonquin in Abitibi , the Ojibway of Western Ontario , the Cree of Western James Bay and the Tutchones of the Yukon that everything is fine in this brave new world . 
go and see the Indian reserves in the year 2000 , and you will see there is no cause for cynicism or sarcasm . 
this is no play on words , these are not pictures of the mind . 
like poverty , the issue of the First Nations is what I would call a national emergency . 
we must have our responsibilities back . 
a structure must be invented nationally that does not yet exist . 
we most go beyond the affirmations of rights and we must act . 
natives must take hold of their present , of their future . 
already the challenge is colossal , is it not right to give us the chance to meet it ? 
in conclusion , honourable senators , it goes much further than that . 
if Canada does not find a way of resolving this situation , it will resolve nothing as a nation . 
urgent corrective action is required , of course , but we must also develop , grow and contribute to the economic and cultural wealth of this country . 
" Indianness " is not limited to moccasins , dancing and traditions . 
the Canada of tomorrow will also belong to the First Nations . 
for we have survived a very sad history . 
we are taking our place , we are taking back our place , and we must succeed in restoring the old partnerships . 
there is no need to reinvent the wheel . 
how many great minds , commissions , consultations , special committees , and research will it take ? I 
think that , during the past 50 years , everything has been said . 
it remains to truly launch the historic process that will enable us to achieve a collective and dignified existence . 
first Nations must govern themselves . 
there is no turning back . 
to become self - sufficient , we need a territory and resources , we need a place of our own in this country . 
we must inform , open minds , help put in place what does not exist yet , promote creativity , political innovation , a return to accountability , self - sufficiency and dignity . 
i want Canada to be a shining light , I do not want it to be disgraced . 
first Nations must take care of themselves with a treasure that was not stolen , with definite rights , resources and a voice in national affairs . 
this is an uphill battle . 
we cannot be denied the right to do ourselves what nobody else can do for us . 
on motion of Senator Watt , debate adjourned . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , prompted by the fact that we are sitting a bit longer than we normally do on a Wednesday , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to sit while the Senate is sitting today , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 95 ( 4 ) , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to sit while the Senate is sitting today , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
office of Children ' s Environmental Health 
motion to Establish Adopted 
hon. Mira Spivak , pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Senate urge the Government to establish an Office of Children ' s Environmental Health , an arm ' s - length agency to promote the protection of children from environmental hazards . 
senators who sat in the committee on Bill C - 32 and heard representatives from the Canadian Institute of Child Health ask for this office will be familiar with much of the reasoning . 
the first and certainly sufficient reason is because an office of children ' s environmental health is badly needed . 
children are particularly vulnerable to environmental pollutants . 
in committee we heard why in scientific terms , and it is worth repeating because it is the key to everything else . 
during the first six months of life , for example , a child drinks seven times more water per kilogram of body weight than an adult . 
between the ages of one and five , a child eats three to four times more food per kilogram of body weight . 
the volume of air that a sleeping infant breathes is twice that of an adult at rest . 
all of this means that polluted water , food or air have a far greater impact on a child than they have on you or I. 
sometimes that impact is lifelong ; sometimes it is irreversible . 
when the environment is the womb or when babies are breast fed by mothers whose bodies warehouse pollution , a small amount of toxin at the wrong point in time can cause everything from blindness , deafness and seizures to lower intelligence . 
in the past few decades , scientists have learned this much from their studies of children who were exposed to lead , or whose mothers ate PCB tainted fish from the Great Lakes , or who were born into communities that suffered methyl mercury poisoning . 
this month , a substantial body of new information was released by the U.S. Centre for Health and Environment and Justice on the effects of a very toxic pollutant - dioxin . 
the report ' s most striking finding is that the dioxin commonly found in food is enough to harm children ' s growth and development . 
ground beef typically has 1.5 parts per trillion dioxin , blue cheese has 0.7 , and a chicken drumstick or haddock 0.03 . 
nursing infants get considerably more dioxin each day than adults . 
that is because dioxin accumulates in breast milk . 
studies suggest , surprisingly , that breast - fed babies in Canada are getting 26 parts per trillion dioxin , which is about 30 per cent more than babies in the United States , more than twice as much as babies in Russia , and more than eight times as much as babies in Thailand . 
i do not know why . 
what precisely does dioxin do to children ? 
prenatal exposure has been linked to lower intelligence , withdrawn or depressed behaviour , hyperactivity and weaker immune systems . 
more girls are born than boys in regions where exposure is high . 
the dioxin report has scores of recommendations to prevent future harm . 
it suggests , for example , that we replace the burning of municipal garbage , the number one source of dioxin , with more intensive recycling , waste reduction and better packages . 
another suggestion is sunsetting the burning of medical and hazardous waste , phasing out plastics , which are another major source of dioxin , or banning dioxin - contaminated pesticides . 
we do have a choice . 
some children have paid a high price to give us knowledge that can lead to prevention , but no one is steering the government to apply it . 
that is one thing an office of children ' s environmental health would do . 
it would determine the existing body of knowledge and work with other government departments and agencies to see that science about children informs regulation . 
without it , standards for tolerable levels of pollution in all likelihood will continue to be set to protect adult males , not women and children . 
however , that is only part of why we need this office . 
we also need such an office to direct research on troubling questions for which we do not yet have good answers . 
why has asthma in children quadrupled in the last few decades ? 
an office of children ' s environmental health could promote that research , as could the centres of excellence for children ' s wellbeing . 
more than two and one - half years ago , the government promised to dedicate $ 20 million over five years to children ' s health research through new centres of excellence . 
some 30 months later , none has been created . 
i hope these centres will be something the government will consider , along with the other recommendations in the Speech from the Throne . 
children ' s health is barely a factor in much of our spending , regulation or policy . 
we do not even know what pollutants are commonly found in play areas , day care centres and schools . 
we have no guidelines to help reduce children ' s exposure to pollutants in areas they commonly use . 
there are other things an office of children ' s environmental health could do . 
the second reason to support this motion is to ensure our country lives up to its promises under the 1998 declaration of the environmental leaders of the G 8 on children ' s environmental health and the 1991 Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
fulfilling these sorts of pledges takes political leadership , something we have certainly seen in the U.S. About the same time that our leaders were promising voters all sorts of things for children , President Clinton ordered every federal agency to make it a high priority to identify environmental health and safety risks that may disproportionately affect children and to change policies , programs , activities and standards to correct the imbalance . 
soon after , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency created its office of children ' s health protection to implement the president ' s executive order and an EPA program was announced in 1995 - the national agenda to protect children ' s health from environmental threats . 
it is not clear how much the agency ' s office and programs can be credited with bringing about change . 
however , we do know , for example , that the U.S. Food Quality Protection Act now requires the re - evaluation of tolerance levels of nearly 10,000 pesticides , a new air standard for ozone is expected to mean 1 million fewer cases a year of decreased lung function in children , and the EPA is directing staff to consider infants , children , and pregnant women when setting standards for drinking water . 
if , however , we focus attention on the most vulnerable among us , the developing child , all of us have a better chance at protection . 
i know the proposed office elicited quite a response from senators opposite when it was discussed in committee . 
i sincerely hope that some of them have continued their interest , will engage in this debate , and will persuade their colleagues to support this motion . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 9 
Thursday , November 18 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
business of the Senate 
the Honourable John B . Stewart 
tributes on Retirement 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Child Day 
MR. IRWIN COTLER 
congratulations on Election as Member of Parliament for Mount Royal 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
post - Secondary Education 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
adjournment 
divorce Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Developments in Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Domestic and International Financial System 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
official Languages 
standing Joint Committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Response to Criticisms from International Community 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Government Policy on Human Security Agenda versus Interests of Investors 
international Trade 
north America Free Trade Agreement - Suit by California Company over Loss of Contract for Bulk Water - Government Position 
government Policy on Defending Against Suits by Corporations 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
national Defence Act DNA Identification Act Criminal Code 
bill to amend - Second Reading 
referred to Committee 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Order Stands 
committee Authorized to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
the SENATE 
Thursday , November 18 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i will be replaced in the Chair by the new Speaker pro tempore , Senator Losier - Cool , whom I congratulate on her appointment to the post . 
the Honourable John B . Stewart 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham : 
honourable senators , when I first met Senator John B . Stewart many years ago , he was already widely respected in the academic community for work that included undergraduate studies at Acadia University and graduate studies at New York ' s Columbia University , as well as being variously professor and chairman of political science at Barnard College in New York . 
John was associated with the Rockefeller Foundation until his return in 1959 to Nova Scotia , at which time he joined the Department of Political Science at St. Francis Xavier University . 
approximately three years later , Professor Stewart was elected as the Liberal Member of Parliament for his home constituency of Antigonish - Guysborough . 
he was re - elected in 1963 and 1965 . 
this was a series of events about which I have some of my fondest political memories . 
after the Diefenbaker sweep of 1958 , the Liberal Riding Association of Antigonish - Guysborough determined that we should conduct an exhaustive search for the most credible candidate possible . 
every time there was a discussion , someone would ask , what about that new professor , John Stewart at - as they say sometimes - St. FX ? 
who would have enough influence and credibility - indeed , the courage - to make the call ? 
it was arranged that Professor Stewart would be in his office in the old wing on the campus on a stormy Saturday night . 
the phone rang : 
hello ? 
Dr. Stewart ? 
this is Lester Pearson . 
and the rest , as they say , is history . 
as a footnote to that story , honourable senators will recall that Mr. Pearson was a great sports fan and a regular viewer of Hockey Night in Canada on Saturday night . 
the call to Dr. Stewart was made from Stornoway between the first and second periods of a game between the Montreal Canadiens and the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
senator Mahovlich : 
who was winning ? 
senator Graham : 
as I recall , Frank was the third star that night . 
in his six years in the House of Commons , John proved to be one of the most assiduous students of the parliamentary system I have ever known , distinguishing himself , as he has all his life , by serious hard work and achievement , always with the greater good of his province and country as his overwhelming objective . 
every class was a sellout . 
it was once said that a teacher affects eternity . 
he or she can never tell where that influence stops . 
in the case of Professor Stewart , with a legendary reputation for producing Rhodes Scholars in his classes , that influence has been most formidable indeed . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they might have turned out ! 
senator Graham : 
fortunately , Professor Stewart got there in time to catch , to tutor and to guide former New Brunswick premier Frank McKenna . 
Dr. Stewart also turned his attentions to reflections upon his parliamentary experience , producing two authoritative and widely read titles on the parliamentary process . 
in one of his earlier works , the Political and Moral Thought of David Hume , Dr. Stewart showed his abiding concern for the moral basis of democratic politics . 
John quoted from the brilliant work of the Scottish philosopher , who is considered to be one of the earliest pioneers of political science , as follows : 
of all men that distinguish themselves by memorable achievements , the first place of honour seems due to legislators who transmit a system of laws and institutions to secure the peace , happiness and liberty of future generations . 
Hume counselled generations of parliamentarians yet to come - all of those wise and fair - minded representatives of the people who understood that the raison d 'ê tre of good government was the crafting of laws and institutions based on justice . 
indeed , Senator John Stewart would become , over his lengthy parliamentary career , the epitome of the wise and conscientious legislator imagined by David Hume centuries before - a legislator indefatigable in the pursuit of the right ; a legislator who understood the importance of vigilance in securing and protecting our free society ; a legislator committed to the public good ; a legislator who left nothing to chance ; a man who brought a razor - sharp mind and tremendous , tireless energy to the service of his community , to his students , to his province and to his country ; a thoughtful patriot who always understood , as the old saying goes , that those who expect to reap the blessings of freedom must undergo the fatigue of supporting it . 
John Stewart ' s profound sense of service led him to put incredible amounts of energy into committees , whether Fisheries or Banking , or whether it was throughout his important and very distinguished tenure as chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee , in which he skilfully , and with the greatest diligence , shepherded the whole complex series of issues that come from Canada ' s respected position as a global player on the world stage . 
canada ' s brilliant Edward Blake spoke simply of the meaning of Parliament in the House of Commons a little over a century ago . 
he said : 
the privileges of Parliament are the privileges of the people . 
the rights of Parliament are the rights of the people . 
these words , honourable senators , have been the hallmark of Senator John Stewart ' s wonderful life and times . 
the rights of Parliament and the privileges of Parliament are rooted in the rights of our people - in the privileges , in the wisdom , in the humanity of our people . 
as one who has had the great privilege of having had John Stewart as a mentor , of being both a colleague and a close friend for many years , I am proud to say that the first place of honour , very deservedly , belongs to this wise and honest legislator , to this wise and committed servant of the people , to this gifted teacher who has left ever - expanding and indelible marks on eternity . 
yes , the first place of honour belongs to Senator John Stewart , who many of us in the public service of this wonderful country will so deeply miss in the days and the years ahead . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I have not done a scientific survey of colleagues , but I think it is likely that Senator Graham and I have known Senator Stewart longer than anyone else in this place . 
at any rate , it is more than 40 years since we first met . 
i think that gives me some licence to pretend to speak authoritatively on the subject at hand . 
in 1959 , a few years after my graduation from St. FX University , I was running their alumni office in Antigonish . 
that fall , Dr. John B . Stewart returned to his native province and his native county from the teaching post that Senator Graham mentioned at Columbia University and a consultancy at the Rockefeller Foundation to take up duties as professor of political science at St. FX . 
every teaching day thereafter , Dr. Stewart and I had lunch together at the same table in the priest ' s dining room at St. FX . 
in that sanctum sanctorum in those days , John Stewart and I were both outsiders - he a Protestant , I a Progressive Conservative . 
happily for John Stewart , those were also the days when the ecumenical movement was getting underway under the leadership of Pope John XXIII . 
the priests were extending the hand of fellowship , friendship and fraternity to what they called " our separated brethren , " of whom John Stewart was one . 
unfortunately , it took the reverend fathers a while longer to warm to Progressive Conservatives . 
however that may be - and I have alluded to this at times in the Senate over the past few years , sometimes at rather tense moments in our debates - I do not think I can remember any professor at St. FX or anywhere else who enjoyed quite the level of respect and admiration from his students that John Stewart received . 
it is true , as Senator Graham said , that I was not Dr. Stewart ' s student in a formal sense , although I , like many others , have been his student here in this place . 
on occasion in debate , he has purported to evaluate my performance . 
i have never received anything better than a gentleman ' s C in those evaluations . 
in any case , I cannot speak from direct experience as to why he enjoyed such considerable esteem from his students . 
i think we can be sure that he did not court popularity by pandering to adolescent culture as some professors do . 
i think it is more likely that he gained their respect because he showed them respect for their intelligence and judgment , and because he set high standards - not unattainably high standards , but high standards nevertheless - and got the best out of his students . 
you will find people many years later - men and women - who will say that the high point of their student days was their exposure to Dr. Stewart . 
a number of these people , I am told , showed up a couple of weeks ago at St. FX University for a special seminar and tribute to their former professor . 
i am sure he must have been very touched indeed by their presence and by the testimony of their respect and esteem . 
this is a scholar who found his way into politics . 
let me say a word about the 1962 election . 
nevertheless , it was a considerable victory for Dr. Stewart . 
he brought the party way back , considering the low state in which it had been left by the previous candidate , Al Graham . 
senator Graham : 
i avoided that . 
senator Murray : 
senator Stewart is a scholar in politics , but he has never been guilty of scholarly detachment from the hurly - burly . 
for one thing , nothing that happened in or around or to his constituency ever escaped his notice . 
a few years after we had been having our daily lunch together in Antigonish , I was up here as ministerial assistant in the Diefenbaker government , and he was the newly minted Member of Parliament for Antigonish - Guysborough . 
i recall receiving a series of irate telegrams about some small parcel of land that the government had bought , or had failed to buy , in the town of Antigonish for a new federal building there . 
no grievance was unimportant , especially when the Tories were in power . 
he is a procedural and constitutional expert , who has been chairman of our Foreign Affairs Committee , but what I recall from my days on the receiving end of questions here is Senator Stewart ' s preoccupation with the fishery in Nova Scotia , with federal highways policy as it affects Nova Scotia , with the fixed link to P.E.I. as it affected Nova Scotia , and with the GST as it affected everybody . 
is this scholar a partisan ? 
let me put it this way . 
as he has always told us , this is a team sport , and it is certainly one at which he excelled . 
senator Graham has mentioned the two books that Dr. Stewart wrote about the Scottish philosopher David Hume . 
the Moral and Political Philosophy of David Hume was the first , and the second was , Opinion and Reform in Hume ' s Political Philosophy . 
honourable senators , I have not read these books . 
in 1761 , the Catholic Church placed all of Hume ' s work on its index of forbidden books , and I must assume that , by extension , John Stewart ' s books about him have fallen under the same index . 
one cannot be too prudent in matters of this kind . 
i have always found that not reading books about or by David Hume is one of the less onerous disciplines imposed by the Catholic Church . 
far from being on anyone ' s index of forbidden books , it should be required reading for every parliamentarian - especially for parliamentarians in the other place . 
we all know that our colleagues in the other place are not great readers of books and that they have the attention span of the proverbial hummingbird , but I would recommend to them chapter 1 . 
there they will find as neat a description of the role of the House of Commons - and , indeed , of Parliament , although Dr. Stewart does not deal specifically with the Senate - as they will ever find anywhere . 
they need , as I suggested in another context the other day , to be reminded of their prerogatives , and they could do no better in that connection than to read John Stewart . 
with Senator Stewart ' s departure , we are losing our best parliamentarian , and Nova Scotia is losing an extraordinarily attentive and able representative . 
if the government wants to offer him a sinecure and an office somewhere on the premises , that is all right with me . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Murray : 
after all , if Senator Grafstein could refer , as he did , to former senator MacEachen as a " national treasure , " surely we can agree that Senator Stewart is a significant non - renewable resource . 
therefore , Your Honour , at the appropriate time , I would be prepared to move , seconded by Senator Lynch - Staunton , whose suggestion this is , that the office space formerly occupied by former senator MacEachen be provided in perpetuity to former Senator Stewart . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
do I understand you , Honourable Senator Murray , to be making a motion ? 
senator Murray : 
with leave . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I find myself in a seat here which gives me the privilege of being recognized by you next . 
that is truly an honour . 
it is a great pleasure to rise to pay tribute to my colleague the Honourable Senator Stewart . 
as I listened carefully to the comments that were made , one of the things running through my mind was that Senator Stewart does have a whimsical and humorous side , which he shared with us at the dinner we held for him when , for example , he spoke of the day he came into this chamber and called Senator Murray a tyrant and His Honour a usurper - in error , as I heard him . 
my fondest recollection of Senator Stewart is not from here but , rather , from my only visit to Antigonish , where I attended the MacEachen conference . 
senator Stewart was kind enough to explain to me the significance of the university at which he taught , St. Francis Xavier , and what to me was the mystery of all of these people running around with rings with Xs on them , people who were partners in my law firm and who seemed to be everywhere around my community of Calgary . 
i now know where they came from . 
i have come to admire their background and the good luck which seems to follow them as former students of St. Francis Xavier . 
with professors such as Senator Stewart as members of the faculty , they have had a good grounding . 
senator Stewart has played a remarkable role here . 
i , too , should like to make reference to one of his books . 
i have not read Hume and , like Senator Murray , do not intend to , but not for the same rigid reason for which Senator Murray is averse to reading Hume . 
it states : 
the unsung heroes of the House are the party house leaders . 
each must have a dual loyalty : to his party and to the House . 
the root of many of their troubles is that their Colleagues are either insouciant to the House or far too interested in it . 
at times they ignore the House . 
at other times it is all - important , so that every facilitating concession to the other side is seen as a disastrous surrender . 
listen well , Senator Boudreau . 
he continues : 
regardless of the conflict of ambition and opinions , the house leaders must make the system function . 
i have become acutely aware of that , in a way that I was not until I arrived here . 
to his great credit , Senator Stewart , as someone who practised as an academician and politician , has offered us all that lesson . 
if only we were all prepared to hear him . 
i hear you now , Senator Stewart . 
senator Stewart , throughout his time here , has been a great leader . 
in particular , he served on the Foreign Affairs Committee with distinction . 
i have had a limited experience in that area myself and have some appreciation of the difficulty of that task . 
senator Stewart has a following on Parliament Hill amongst his students , and , I hasten to add , honourable senators , for we are all students of John Stewart . 
we respect him as a teacher , for many times we have learned from him and followed his guidance in our deliberations . 
senator Stewart , I believe the highest form of tribute this house can offer a senator is its profound respect . 
we will miss your contribution though you have left us with a great deal and , in particular , some very important principles by which to live . 
may your retirement be filled with new experiences , wonderful books to read and write , and minds to shape . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I met John Stewart for the first time in the fall of 1988 , when I was appointed to the Senate . 
for five years we sat together on the National Finance Committee and , for the last 11 years , we served together on the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
we also have some other things in common : post - graduate studies in the United States , university teaching , a particular taste for political philosophy , and what I would call a certain vocation for the public service - John Stewart as a member of the House of Commons and the Senate and I as a civil servant and a senator . 
other things , however , make us different . 
he is an anglophone of Scottish descent , Protestant , cold towards the United States but a Harvard Liberal nonetheless , and a distinguished writer . 
i am a francophone , French Canadian , Catholic , Chicago conservative , a friend of the United States , and an ex - manager . 
i must say , however , that we have shared many undertakings over the years ; namely , program analysis of governmental expenditures , inquiries of various aspects of Canadian foreign policy and more particularly of the trade policy , because of the heavy emphasis in the last decade on international commerce . 
of course , John was against the Free Trade Agreement , as Senator Murray mentioned . 
i believe it was because he was on the opposition side of the chamber and that he wished to argue that side of the case , knowing that we would defend the other side and that eventually the people of Canada would decide . 
it might also be because he thought that the deal was not as good as the Auto Pact , recently sanctioned by the World Trade Organization . 
at any rate , it was a hot debate here in the Senate , as was the one on the GST , though more civilized than the latter , I should point out . 
in the National Finance Committee , we covered a great deal , in particular , the diverse aspects of governmental administrative policy . 
i still have a vivid memory of our inquiry on the Royal Recommendation . 
our learned colleague John Stewart , a specialist of parliamentary procedure , about which he produced a book in 1997 , took tremendous pleasure in putting numerous witnesses into a corner with his legal distinctions . 
these reminded me of the metaphysical disputes of the Jesuits and the Thomists of the 16 th century , notably by Suarez among others . 
speaking of philosophy , I should like to point out , honourable senators , that our colleague has a Doctorate of Public Law and Government , and a Master of Political Philosophy degree , and in particular , he is an international authority on David Hume . 
he has published two books on Hume ' s writings . 
i can tell you that after reading Hume ' s biography , I came to realize that John has many things in common with that great Scottish writer : a friend of books , frugality , the solitary aspects of his personality , his sceptic but healthy mind . 
sometimes I think of him as a neo - Scottish Montesquieu . 
however , his hero was a good friend of Adam Smith , although I believe that John does not think as highly of him as I do . 
let us come back to David Hume . 
the review is a biannual publication , highly rated in philosophical academic circles . 
in this august international group of university luminaries , I must tell you that our colleague is a high priest . 
in November 1995 there was a critical analysis of his second book on Hume . 
John brilliantly defended his thesis that Hume was indeed a precursor of the British Liberal tradition and not of the Conservative one . 
one of his critics , Douglas Long , has written : 
John B . Stewart has shown himself once again to be a serious , penetrating and appreciative Hume scholar . 
i bow before such versatility , or " polyvalence " , which allows our senator to jump from political theory to political practice . 
after all , he has been elected three times , therefore , he is not only a good theoretical mind but a competent historian of the last centuries of British political life . 
as chairman of our Foreign Affairs Committee , he has shrewdly led our studies of important issues which have produced many pertinent propositions , we believe , for guiding the international course of this country . 
our last report on the European Union ' s impact on Canada , which was a follow - up to the one we produced a few years back , is a valid example of that . 
the next report , which he directed as chairman , on NATO and Canada , should also make all senators proud of the work of this committee . 
during his whole political career , John has fought for the legitimate interests of Maritimers . 
i hope he will leave for a happy retirement , but I am sure that he has not yet written his last book . 
i wish him a prosperous life with his royalties , much like his famous British predecessor . 
hon. Marie - P . 
Poulin : 
honourable senators , during the 132 years since Confederation , many distinguished Canadians have inhabited the confines of these chamber walls . 
their knowledge , wisdom , perspicacity and lucidity have contributed in no small measure to the affairs of the nation . 
we know that we have among us a truly respected Canadian in Senator John B . Stewart , who can legitimately join the pantheon of such senatorial giants as the Honourables Eugene Forsey , Raoul Dandurand , Muriel McQueen Fergusson , Cairine Wilson , Chubby Power , Duff Roblin and Arthur Meighen . 
they have all contributed in particularly outstanding ways , as any historian or observer of this chamber will testify . 
senator Stewart ' s contribution to the Senate over the 15 years since his appointment has been his penetrating wit and his broad knowledge , both of which have earned him an enviable reputation among his colleagues . 
that reputation has gone beyond the limits of this chamber , to the seats of decision - making in this country , where his views on foreign affairs , banking , commerce and fisheries bear considerable weight . 
as anyone who has engaged in a debate with him is well aware , his great eloquence makes him an opponent to be feared . 
senator Stewart never leans toward exaggeration or grandiloquence . 
this is an erudite man , a dignified and refined man , a " mensch " , as they say . 
his views are always balanced , a character trait greatly appreciated by those expressing opinions to him , something I have often had the privilege of witnessing . 
this politician , professor and author has brought honour to this institution . 
it is a loss for us and for the country that the time has come for him to leave the Senate . 
we will miss his ideas and his action , as well as his good advice . 
i wish our friend nothing but the best in this new stage in his life . 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
next week , we will be paying tribute to Senator Derek Lewis , also from Atlantic Canada . 
while this is a time to celebrate their accomplishments , both here and elsewhere , senators are saddened by the fact that both of them will be retiring from the Senate within the next few days . 
this is truly a loss , both for us who remain , and for the Senate as a parliamentary institution . 
both senators , through their participation in committees and through their contributions to this chamber , have invariably been able to raise the tenor of debate , bringing insight and wisdom from their different backgrounds to the issues before us . 
we wish him well in his retirement . 
senator John Stewart , a former member of the House of Commons from Nova Scotia for Antigonish - Guysborough , is the only person I have ever met from Nova Scotia who knows where Cook ' s Cove is , which is where my grandfather was born . 
it is a suburb of Guysborough . 
senator Stewart is an academic , an author , and a student of Parliament . 
before coming to this place , I knew Senator Stewart only by reputation through his work in the House of Commons and from those who admired his academic endeavours . 
however , on my first committee assignment to the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee , I sat in awe of his knowledge and his ability in chairing the committee . 
those who think less of our government institutions would do well to study Senator Stewart ' s work both here and in the other place . 
he has always demonstrated his great regard for the role of Parliament in Canadian society , for its processes , and for the important role reasoned opposition could play , as well as his appreciation of good debate . 
this was the case no matter who offered the points , as long as they were valid in his eyes . 
that said , he always remained loyal to caucus discipline , which qualifies him as a good Liberal . 
as well , he has had an almost perfect attendance record since the time he was appointed . 
senator Stewart took his responsibilities very seriously . 
i will sincerely miss sitting opposite him and watching his expressions , as points both good and bad made in debate registered on his face . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , today we say farewell to one of the finest and most dedicated parliamentarians it has been my privilege to know over the last 37 years . 
as has been agreed today , the Senate will lose a most valued member when Senator John Stewart retires tomorrow . 
for us on this side of the chamber , he is very close to being irreplaceable . 
senator Stewart has built his life around learning , teaching , and public service in his province of Nova Scotia , and particularly at St. Francis Xavier University in his beautiful hometown of Antigonish . 
he has been an activist and a conscience of the Liberal Party of Nova Scotia and the Liberal Party of Canada . 
he turned to the federal political scene in 1962 as the Liberal Member of Parliament for Antigonish - Guysborough , which position he held for three terms . 
it was during that period of time that I , as a young journalist in the Parliamentary Press Gallery , came to know him . 
senator Stewart provided that expertise with wisdom and judgment . 
i know that my colleagues on this side of the house will sorely miss his guidance . 
this may turn out to be a banner day for Senator Stewart . 
senator Murray has offered him an office in perpetuity . 
however , I would ask him to consider that carefully , because he could probably make a fortune consulting on parliamentary procedure . 
the leadership he has shown in the Foreign Affairs Committee has been , as the younger generation would say , " cool " and truly " awesome " . 
senator Stewart has had a tremendous effect on many of us in this chamber . 
one magic moment for me was following the election of 1988 when Senator Stewart asked me if I would like to join the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
i thought I had truly made it . 
it then became clear that I was to serve only during the Christmas break to help fulfill our commitment that , if an election were called by our friends opposite , we would pass the Free Trade Agreement by January 1 of 1989 . 
nonetheless , it was great fun during that period of time . 
i enjoyed it immensely . 
when it was over , I went back to my usual work in the Senate . 
i have yet to enter again those hallowed halls of the Foreign Affairs Committee as a member . 
however , there is still hope . 
i wish to reflect for a moment on what Senator Stewart has accomplished in that committee . 
in this turbulent decade of shifting international trade groupings , of financial and commodity disruptions in areas of the world that have a profound effect on Canadian opportunities , and an all - too - steady progression of vicious military conflicts , Senator Stewart has led our committee through thoughtful and in - depth studies of significance to policy - makers and political leaders in Canada and well beyond , if they have the common sense and the industry to read those reports . 
there is no question that John Stewart has brought a powerful personal commitment to defining a realistic approach to our unending preoccupation with war and peace in the modern context , which , as he said in one of his early speeches in this house , sometimes tends to tire us out and foster a lack of will to persist in advancing that cause . 
as he spoke in support of the establishment of the Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security back in June of 1984 , he urged us to " fight back against the fog of weariness , the fog of cynicism . " 
he decried all of those who talk only about the " problems of peace . " 
in saying farewell to him today , I should like to read a short passage from that speech , which gives Canadian citizens a ringing encouragement to press on , each in their own way , to keep the optimism for world peace continuously alive . 
i quote from John Stewart ' s speech of June 28 , 1984 , in this house , wherein he said : 
the old adage says that liberty is maintained by eternal vigilance . 
we must go back and track over the same ground , do many of the same things again , to educate ourselves and to educate the new generations as they come along . 
the mere fact that there is need for so much repetition should not cause us to think that nothing is being accomplished . 
every day that peace is maintained , an accomplishment has been made ; and , as circumstances change , new approaches must be adopted . 
honourable senators , those kind of words are the legacy of John Stewart and his work in this house , his work in Parliament , his work for Canada and , indeed , his work for the world . 
personally , I am enormously sad to see him leave . 
he has been a good friend for a long time . 
his quiet and steady support for me when I served as leader of the government in the Senate was generous and wise . 
i could not have done the job without it . 
i wish him vigorous good health and happiness as he goes back to his beloved province and Antigonish . 
John , keep on speaking and keep on writing . 
my husband , Mike , shall miss you , and so shall Bessie . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , it is a privilege , indeed , to add a few words on the retirement of Senator Stewart . 
many things have been said about Senator Stewart from those who have known him for much longer than I have known him . 
however , there are a few thoughts that I should like to put on the record . 
however , it was Senator Stewart who taught us that Parliament is more than eloquence and speeches ; that it is the ability to speak one to the other , to question one another , to come to consensus and to find common ground . 
i thank him for teaching me that it is more than just my ability to speak ; it is the ability to listen to others that is most important . 
we must try to find some common ground on behalf of the national interest . 
i have had the privilege of being the deputy chair and a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee since my arrival in the Senate . 
i wish to paraphrase , perhaps badly , something Senator Stewart has said in our committee : 
most members come to the committee with their own particular perspectives . 
as he said , we all sit on our own hill , bringing our own temperament , our own ideas , our own philosophies and our own issues to the table . 
somehow , it is the responsibility of the chairman to bring all these together in some landscape . 
i believe that Senator Stewart has fulfilled his own challenge of what a chairman should be in the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
we were not an easy bunch to deal with . 
we all came with our vested opinions . 
senator Stewart certainly gave each one of us the opportunity to speak and to put across our points of view . 
he exemplified what is best in a chairman , that is , fairness - fairness toward each member , fairness toward the issue and fairness toward the responsibilities of the Senate . 
he brought to the committee that which I cherish most , namely , an academic bent . 
after about six months into my stay here , when I was waxing eloquent on some point or another , one senator said , " Do not worry about her ; she is an academic . " 
the comment was said in less than complimentary terms . 
however , I felt that every time I spoke on an issue , Senator Stewart encouraged us to reach for a greater sophisticated level , a greater thought - provoking level on the issues with which we were dealing . 
he had a way of bringing us into line from time to time . 
more often than not , he had a way of challenging us to do a little better and to work a little harder in the committee . 
as Senator Bolduc has said , our reports speak for themselves . 
they have been reviewed by those in areas of importance , sometimes by those in government , sometimes by those in the capitals of other countries , and always by those who study foreign policy issues . 
senator Stewart ' s work was done with charm , wit and with the sincere desire to further the work of the Senate . 
more often than not , when others were losing their heads , Senator Stewart had the ability to keep his and to be a gentleman throughout the process . 
the greatest gifts are to be able to keep one ' s calm , to keep one ' s civility and to keep the process moving forward . 
senator Stewart , I thank you for the years you served as chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
i thank you for the things that you have taught us . 
other senators have covered your professorial bent sufficiently , so I will not go into that . 
however , I certainly share their point of view . 
i trust that Senator Stewart will continue to watch our work . 
i hope that he will continue to enjoy the academic and political environment and , most of all , that he will continue to prod Canadians to reach the level of inquiry and excellence that he has attained in this chamber . 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , this is one of the days that I have dreaded - the retirement of Senator John Stewart . 
i did not know Senator Stewart before 1984 when he came to the Senate . 
someone referred to Senator Stewart ' s regard for house leaders . 
i understand that . 
we have forgotten that since 1984 there have been majority Parliaments . 
senator Stewart was elected by a small majority in three minority Parliaments . 
i also was elected in two minority Parliaments . 
in that atmosphere , one appreciates the responsibility of the house leader . 
i have always been a great admirer of Senator MacEachen , and when I met Senator Stewart in 1984 , I become a great admirer of Senator Stewart . 
he has contributed in an enormous way to the Foreign Affairs Committee , of which I have been a member since we started our hearings on the Free Trade Agreement in 1986 . 
we became a committee that met a great deal , and Senator Stewart became the chairman . 
it is simply impossible to describe Senator Stewart ' s impact on our committee . 
honourable senators , Senator Stewart is a great teacher . 
people who knew him before I did have told us that . 
however , I , who came upon Senator Stewart here in the Senate , have learned that he is , for me anyway , the greatest teacher that I ever met . 
he has taught us how public business should be treated . 
he has high standards and values . 
increasingly , perhaps as we all grow older , we wonder about values and standards . 
when one come across someone like Senator Stewart , it is such a refreshing experience . 
he may be a political scientist , but he is also a philosopher . 
it is not by accident that one of his great loves is David Hume . 
he shares values himself with David Hume . 
he has added immeasurably to our Foreign Affairs Committee , which has produced some excellent reports under his chairmanship . 
our challenge now is to maintain that standard . 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
that was the first time I had voted in a federal election . 
i should not say for which side I voted , but I think Senator Stewart forgives me for having voted for Louis Comeau , who ran for the Progressive Conservatives at that time . 
in fact , I think Senator Stewart has forgiven me on a number of occasions for that . 
my point is not to reminisce about an election held 31 years ago , but to note that I wish we had had time to reorganize the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries so that we could have made the proper speeches to Senator Stewart at that committee , because he has been one of the great members and contributors to it . 
on behalf of the members of the Fisheries Committee , I thank him for the way he has contributed to the various complex issues that faced us over the years . 
he earned the respect of committee members , witnesses and industry with his formidable research abilities , deep knowledge and expertise . 
on subject matters we sometimes found complex , Senator Stewart was able to simplify them . 
he was always willing to share his wise counsel with all of us . 
on behalf of myself and my colleagues , Senator Stewart , we shall miss you . 
you have been a great teacher . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , for all those things that are honourable , just and true , I should like to associate myself with the very kind words being expressed to and for Senator John Stewart today . 
my seatmate , Senator Watts , and I were sworn in on the very same day in January 1984 . 
it was that day when I met Senator John Stewart . 
you can say the bunch of us came together . 
senator Stewart , I have read some of your books . 
the one that I read most recently was your most recent book on David Hume . 
however , I must tell honourable senators that Senator Stewart gave me a copy of that book as a gift in return for a three - year loan of another book that I had loaned to him . 
when he offered me his book as a present , he cautioned me that he was doing that in lieu of charging me rent for storage . 
senator Stewart and I served on a few committees together . 
one that is especially important to me was his substituting for a period of time on the special committee studying Bill C - 21 on unemployment insurance when it travelled to Nova Scotia , in particular to Canso . 
it is fair to say to Senator Murray and to the Tory senators across the way that in 1989 , on that particular issue , on that particular trip and in that particular part of the world , we won the public relations and the media battle on that bill . 
honourable senators , Nova Scotia - born John Stewart , of Scottish heritage , and Senator Allan J . MacEachen , also Nova Scotia - born and of Scottish heritage , were a multitude . 
during the 1990 goods and services tax filibuster here in this chamber , Leader of the Government Senator Murray , another Nova Scotia person of Scottish heritage , felt the full weight of their multitude . 
honourable senators , it has been said by many that Edward Blake had been the greatest lawyer to serve in the Parliament of Canada , and also that Allan J . MacEachen had been the greatest parliamentarian to serve . 
i should like to say that John Stewart was certainly the greatest scholar and the greatest philosopher to have served here . 
his keen and exceptional intelligence , his clarity of mind , his knowledge of Parliament and his knowledge of principles and moral philosophy sustained our Liberal Party through very difficult and sometimes dark years of opposition from 1984 to 1993 . 
i should like to thank Senator Stewart and express my own special affection and respect for this man , and I should like to do so in a poetic way . 
since you are a Nova Scotian , I say to you , Senator Stewart , fare thee well , and that is from the " fair maiden of Canso " , as Senator MacEachen dubbed me during that particular time . 
some of us here , honourable senators , attended the MacEachen conference at St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish some years ago and had an opportunity , at close quarters , to have a serious look at a particular institution where some of the finest in the country were trained . 
i should like to leave honourable senators with the Biblical quotation from which the motto of that school was taken . 
it is from the Epistle to the Philippians , chapter 4 , verse 8 : 
finally , brethren , whatsoever things are true , whatsoever things are honest , whatsoever things are just , whatsoever things are pure , whatsoever things are lovely , whatsoever things are of good report ; if there be any virtue , and if there be any praise , think on these things . 
senator Stewart , I wish you well in your retirement . 
i am anticipating your next book on David Hume . 
you leave this place with great respect , great love and great affection . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i came here a few short weeks ago badly in need of a mentor of the quality of Senator Stewart . 
he was kind enough to agree to sponsor me into this institution , and it will always be a matter of deep personal regret for me that he leaves now with my education barely begun . 
i must tell you that this is not the first time this has happened to me . 
in 1962 , I arrived in Antigonish , at St. FX University , eager to study philosophy and political science , hoping against hope that I could become a student at the feet of John Stewart , the professor , much the same as I did literally weeks ago . 
unfortunately for me , within a short time after my arrival on campus , he left to take up the challenge of political life and went on to an absolutely brilliant career . 
at that time I was again cheated of the opportunity to learn at the feet of the master . 
honourable senators , I say that for one reason . 
senator Stewart would know that , in Scottish culture and tradition , there is a belief in the forerunner . 
the forerunner is a person or a thing which signals events to come in the future . 
my arrival at St. FX in 1962 signalled for Senator Stewart the beginning of a new and important and brilliant career , unfortunately for me . 
i remain confident that my arrival here in the Senate short weeks ago will once again be the forerunner of a new , exciting , important and brilliant career for him . 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I , too , should like to join other senators this afternoon in paying tribute to the Honourable Senator John Stewart . 
i very much want to associate myself with the sentiments that have been so eloquently expressed by many colleagues today . 
i have only a few words to add . 
senator John Stewart has very strong connections to Prince Edward Island . 
his father was born in my province , and many of his relatives still live there . 
although Senator Stewart was not born in Prince Edward Island , he lived there for five years , so I consider him to be an Islander . 
in fact , the Stewart house , which is in Keppoch Road , near Charlottetown , is now owned and occupied by Dr. Colin McMillan , who is a brother to the Honourable Tom McMillan , who was in the cabinet of Brian Mulroney . 
as an Atlantic Canadian , I must say that I am extremely sad to see Senator Stewart leave this place . 
his expertise , his knowledge in so many areas , as well as his strong commitment to Atlantic Canada , will be greatly missed . 
since coming to the Senate two years ago , I have often sought out Senator Stewart for his advice and his support . 
today I wish to thank him publicly for the assistance and the support that he has given me . 
as has been indicated here this afternoon , Senator Stewart has had a distinguished career in this place , and his presence and input will be greatly missed . 
however , I am sure that he will continue to work for the benefit of all Canadians . 
senator Stewart , I extend my best wishes to you on your retirement from this place . 
hon. L é once Mercier : 
at the reception the other evening , in the foyer of the Senate , fabulous and very valuable prizes were awarded . 
my three colleagues Senators Bacon , Ferretti Barth and Maheu , were seated at my table . 
they looked over at Senator Stewart from time to time . 
i asked them why they were looking at him . 
they said : " Mr. Mercier , Senator Stewart looks younger than you . " 
i am therefore unable to speak on the subject . 
i believe , honourable senators , that the way things are done when someone leaves the Senate should be changed somewhat . 
you have yet to say the best things about this man . 
what you are saying makes no sense . 
i have a list of things to tell you , truth , not fiction . 
i have known him for three years . 
to complete the well - deserved tributes being paid today , the individual leaving us could propose adjournment so that everyone leaves at once . 
it will be difficult to get down to business again , later . 
we are being nostalgic . 
we do not have the time to say to ourselves that so and so has spoken well . 
the fine speeches come to an end , and we move on with Question Period . 
have you considered the fact that with Senator Stewart ' s departure I lose a vote ? 
we should try to change the way we do things to mark someone ' s departure significantly . 
when I was in elementary school and the inspector came for a visit , we got the day off . 
we could do the same thing in the Senate . 
what is on the Order Paper could wait until tomorrow or Monday . 
we have nothing vital to hear today , apart from my remarks . 
do not forget , Senator Stewart , to move adjournment . 
i was going to forget the extraordinary things that fascinate me . 
you forgot , honourable senators , to say that this man has demonstrated the qualities necessary to be a senator , that he was intelligent in his discussions and wise in his committee chairmanship . 
he has met many challenges with distinction and has demonstrated a great sense of responsibility . 
as a senator , he has helped establish the Senate ' s impeccable reputation . 
he has marked the Senate , as others will do in the future . 
for the three years I have been fortunate enough to spend working with him , I have appreciated his honesty , sincerity and respect for others . 
in his private and his professional lives , he has earned the respect and the admiration of his colleagues and his acquaintances . 
senator Stewart lives by the saying , " Do unto others as you would have them do unto you . " 
that is a wonderful motto to live by . 
as well , on a personal note , one to which I am sure others can attest , I should like to compliment the senator on his wonderful fashion sense , and would like to have the name of his tailor before he leaves . 
i know that I speak for all of us when I say that the Senate and Canada loses an excellent representative today . 
his insight and wisdom will be missed . 
i wish you all the best . 
hon. John B . Stewart : 
honourable senators , as Senator Graham has said , in 1962 I was asked to consider seeking the Liberal nomination in the federal constituency of Antigonish - Guysborough . 
i did not know how to respond . 
the incumbent Progressive Conservative member , Clement O ' Leary , later a member of this honourable house , was highly regarded . 
moreover , the Stanfield political machine was making the " Big Blue Machine " in Ontario look somewhat obsolete . 
my chances of winning were very small . 
finally , I yielded to temptation . 
i rationalized my decision by telling myself that , as a professor of political science , it was my duty to undertake the campaign as a piece of academic research . 
as it turned out , I was elected with a majority of 113 . 
i attribute a great deal of my success - far more than 113 votes - to the work of Alasdair Graham . 
then I managed to get re - elected in 1963 and 1965 . 
the redistribution before the 1968 election merged most of Antigonish - Guysborough with Allan MacEachen ' s constituency . 
consequently , I went carpetbagging down to Southwest Nova . 
alas , unlike most of the rest of Canada , during that election Nova Scotians were not possessed by Trudeaumania . 
once again , we Liberals were running against Mr. Stanfield , then the new federal Progressive Conservative leader . 
Allan MacEachen was the only Liberal elected in our province . 
having lost in Southwest Nova , I returned to St. Francis Xavier University . 
since for me this was an academic undertaking , I should say a word or two about the results of my research . 
what did I learn in the House of Commons ? 
first , I learned a great deal about the good people of Antigonish and Guysborough counties ; especially about their wharves , their breakwaters , and especially about the urgent need of dredging before the beginning of the lobster season in the early spring . 
second , I learned something about the economic problems of Western Canada . 
in January 1984 , I was summoned to the Senate . 
what did I learn here ? 
first , I gained a new respect for this house . 
it is not the " old folks club " that some professors and some journalists say it is . 
second , I learned that the Senate can do important legislative work . 
understandably , many members of the other place have little time for non - controversial and technical bills . 
consequently , the Senate can complement the work of the House of Commons . 
third , I learned the value of our committee work . 
even to mention committee work makes me think of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
senators boast about the importance of our committee reports ; however , I believe we pay insufficient attention to some of those reports here in this very chamber . 
our report , for example , on Canada in Asia - Pacific attracted attention in the Antipodes and yet very little in the Senate itself . 
i trust that our European report will bring on a debate here . 
the second report , the one on Canada and peacekeeping , should be ready within a few weeks . 
in that case , I am fully confident that you will have a robust debate on the committee ' s findings and recommendations . 
in fact , I hope that the committee will make them sufficiently provocative to guarantee such a debate . 
i wish to thank the Banking Committee , especially Senator Kirby , for all that I learned while I was on that committee . 
the same is true for the Fisheries Committee , as chaired by Senator Comeau . 
there are many others to thank . 
i mention Irene Duy , who was my secretary throughout almost all of my Senate years . 
no task was ever beyond her zeal or ability . 
i am glad to see her and her husband in the gallery this afternoon . 
David Murphy has been my researcher . 
his knowledge and diligence have been indispensable to me , especially in relation to the work of the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
David Raynor , who is a professor at Ottawa University and a relative of our former colleague Heath Macquarrie , kept reminding me of how much modern politicians owe to David Hume and Adam Smith . 
i should tell you that in the 1980 s I started to write a book on Adam Smith , but what turned out was a second book on David Hume . 
the relationship between these two writers is direct and close . 
Smith built directly upon the foundation laid down by his slightly older predecessor . 
as stated without exaggeration in the foreword to the report I presented yesterday , the committee came to rely greatly on the competence of Peter Berg , our researcher . 
on the peacekeeping report , Wolfgang Koerner has been hard at work , striving with admirable success to keep abreast of all the breaking news about Kosovo , the European security and defence identity , NATO , and the United Nations . 
that reference , proposed by Senator Lynch - Staunton , has proven timely , indeed , all too timely . 
David Goetz has helped us with splendid research on two questions : one relating to NATO ' s intervention in Yugoslavia without a UN mandate , and the second on the role Parliament should play when Canada takes part in these peacekeeping missions . 
three clerks have served the committee in recent years . 
i refer to Serge Pelletier , Line Gravel , and Till Heyde . 
both here and abroad , they were our faithful and skillful pilots . 
all the people who work around the Senate have been most helpful ; the Speaker , the officers at the Table , the general staff and , of course , our security constables . 
reference was made by Senator Fairbairn to Bessie . 
Bessie is a wonderful dog , and I commission Senator Fairbairn to carry my greetings to her . 
i want to thank all who have spoken here today , and also those who have spoken to me privately . 
you have exaggerated and , thereby , you have set for me a high standard for the future . 
both retrospectively and prospectively , I thank you for all your kind words . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , before moving on to Routine Proceedings , I want to take this opportunity to thank you for your show of confidence in appointing me to this position . 
i am deeply honoured and touched . 
i also know that with your cooperation we will work in the best interests of the Senate . 
i am confident that we will all work together for the Senate of Canada with respect and dignity . 
to Senator Stewart I say , " Bonne chance . " 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Child Day 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
in the recent Speech from the Throne , numerous commitments were made by the government to Canada ' s children . 
seven specific initiatives were highlighted as priorities over the next five years . 
as important as all seven initiatives are , I find myself drawn to one specific commitment , that being the one which focuses on support for early childhood development . 
a leading expert in the field of early childhood development is Dr. Fraser Mustard . 
his research has shown that early intervention is fundamental for child development as it sets the stage for learning , behaviour , and health throughout the life cycle . 
his work has generated various programs in early childhood development throughout Canada . 
i should like to highlight one of these programs for you today , and that is the Child Alliance Initiative in Prince Edward Island . 
child Alliance is a community initiative which was established in June of 1998 by a group of concerned citizens . 
it brings together governments and non - governmental groups and organizations working with young children and their families . 
the goal is to create a vehicle to explore options and address the root causes of compounding social issues on young children . 
prince Edward Island , through the Child Alliance Initiative , is undertaking a real leadership role in this area . 
a specific program , made possible by support from the Child Alliance Initiative , is entitled , " Best Start " . 
this is an intensive screening assessment and in - home visiting program that targets support to children from birth to three years of age . 
following the birth of their children , all parents in the region will be offered voluntary participation in a screening and assessment process that will be performed by public health nurses . 
families who would benefit from the in - home support will then be referred to a Best Start worker . 
the program is designed , among other things , to enhance family functioning and to promote positive parent - child interaction and healthy childhood growth . 
the program will be assessed and evaluated in June , 2000 . 
honourable senators , children are our future , and on this year ' s National Child Day it should be the goal of every community to make the early years the best years . 
if we want young Canadians to reach out and achieve for themselves , for each other , and for the future , we must ensure that programs such as those put forth by Child Alliance Initiative become a national priority . 
MR. IRWIN COTLER 
congratulations on Election as Member of Parliament for Mount Royal 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I rise today to congratulate my friend and newly elected colleague , Professor Irwin Cotler , a proven leader whose actions and words fit the traditions , history and heritage promoted by past leaders from the riding of Mount Royal such as Pierre Elliott Trudeau and John Humphrey . 
human rights , the Canadian Charter of Freedoms and Rights , international human rights conventions , and the rule of law are key to a quality of lifestyle in a democratic country . 
those key issues , and many others , make daily life worth living and are the hallmarks of Irwin Cotler ' s activities . 
his is a household name among those in this country who care deeply about the preservation of democratic society and fundamental human rights . 
it is clear that an innate sense of fairness underlies his commitment to the preservation of these values . 
as Harvard professor Alan Dershowitz told La Presse regarding our new member of Parliament : 
he is not interested in himself . 
until very recently , he has travelled around the world , at his own expense , to defend men who were in jail because of their opinions . 
these people owe a part of their freedom to him . 
Nelson Mandela in South Africa , Anatoly Scharansky in Israel , Andrei Sakharov in Russia , Nobel literature prize recipient Wole Soyinka in Nigeria , Jacobo Timmerman in Latin America , and Muchtar Pakpahan in Asia . 
he defended these men without any thought of money or publicity . 
according to Irwin Colter , his first law professor and philosopher was his father , who always told him that the pursuit of justice was the most important thing . 
honourable senators , I think he has mastered that philosophy quite well . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
i regret to interrupt the Honourable Senator Finestone , but her time has expired . 
is there leave , honourable senators , for the honourable senator to continue her speech ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Finestone : 
i thank honourable senators . 
professor Irwin Cotler has made a profound mark in the world of human rights . 
it is now time for him to bring to Parliament his sense of fairness , his compassion and his caring for the citizens of Mount Royal , for Canada and for the world . 
with these remarks , honourable senators , I welcome Mr. Cotler to the other place . 
i know he will bring us all great food for thought and diversity of opinion . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Leo E . Kolber : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
post - Secondary Education 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Senate Committee on Post - Secondary Education , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
divorce Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Anne C . Cools presented Bill S - 12 , to amend the Divorce Act ( child of the marriage ) . 
bill read first time 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , November 30 , 1999 . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , on behalf of Senator Kirby , I give notice that on Tuesday next , November 23 , 1999 , he will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I give notice on behalf of the Honourable Michael Kirby that , on Tuesday next , November 23 , 1999 , he will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Developments in Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 , I will move : 
in particular , the Committee shall be authorized to examine : 
the progress on the implementation of the unanimous recommendations made in the report ; 
2 . Developments in Canada respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; 
3 . Developments in foreign jurisdictions respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than June 6 , 2000 . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Domestic and International Financial System 
hon. Leo E . Kolber : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , November 23 , 1999 , I will move : 
that , the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce be authorized to examine and report upon the present state of the domestic and international financial system ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament and any other relevant Parliamentary papers and evidence on the said subject be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings ; 
that notwithstanding usual practices , the Committee be permitted to deposit an interim report on the said subject with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not sitting , and that the said report shall thereupon be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 31 , 2000 . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , I give notice on behalf of the Honourable Senator Austin , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) ; 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders have power to sit at 4:30 p.m. on Tuesdays , even though the Senate may then be sitting , from now until the end of December 1999 , in order for the Committee to deal expeditiously with the questions of privilege raised by the Honourable Senator Andreychuk and the Honourable Senator Kinsella , which have been referred to the Committee , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honorable senators , is it your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
official Languages 
standing Joint Committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to make a request of senators in the context of the work of the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages . 
the Honourable the Speaker pro tempore is a member of that committee . 
therefore , I wish to move the following motion in her place . 
honourable senators , on behalf of Senator Losier - Cool , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( f ) , I move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages have power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; and 
that a message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House thereof . 
this committee has traditionally sat even though the Senate is sitting and this motion is consistent with past practice of the Senate . 
in fact , it intends to sit next Tuesday , before we meet here . 
thus , there is the request that this motion be dealt with now . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Response to Criticisms from International Community 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i am sure that we are all aware of the saying that " people who live in glass houses should not throw stones . " 
canada has been a champion for protecting the well - being and safety of individuals around the world . 
the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Mr. Axworthy , has been quick to criticize other countries when they fail to uphold human rights . 
yesterday , however , the U.S. State Department reversed this role and severely criticized Canada for the continuing commercial operations in Sudan by Calgary - based oil firm Talisman Energy Inc. 
they also accused the Liberal government of abandoning its " ` high road ' approach to foreign policy by ` turning a blind eye ' to the Khartoum regime ' s atrocities . " 
the State Department claims that Talisman ' s exploitation of Sudan ' s oil fields was facilitated by the Khartoum government ' s use of " bombers , helicopters gun - ships and artillery against unarmed civilians . " 
they fear that Talisman ' s investment in Sudan ' s oil sector will support the fundamentalist regime ' s efforts to continue its civil war in the south of Sudan . 
to date , the Canadian government has yet to order Talisman out of the country and has steered away from sanctions against Sudan , despite pressure on the Minister of Foreign Affairs from Canadian and international NGOs , as well as the Inter - Church Coalition on Africa for over a year . 
in fact , Mr. Axworthy has only recently committed to a fact - finding mission in Sudan . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this matter has come to the attention of the Canadian government and the minister responsible . 
it is being taken very seriously . 
the reports linking the Canadian private sector interest that the honourable senator mentioned to alleged violations of human rights and international law are matters of grave concern . 
as the honourable senator pointed out , the Minister of Foreign Affairs has commissioned an independent Canadian mission to Sudan to immediately examine the reported link between human rights violations and this company . 
he will expect a report and will act on its contents . 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Government Policy on Human Security Agenda versus Interests of Investors 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the issue here is whether or not this Canadian private sector company is in violation of human rights and international law . 
if that is the case , then the Government of Canada may consider economic and trade sanctions with respect to this activity . 
by his recent actions , clearly the minister is very concerned and will act promptly once he receives the independent commission ' s report . 
international Trade 
north America Free Trade Agreement - Suit by California Company over Loss of Contract for Bulk Water - Government Position 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i understand that a small California company called Sunbelt is suing the federal government for about $ 10.5 billion in compensation for avoidance of a contract with the B.C. government for the purchase of bulk water . 
Sunbelt is suing under the NAFTA investor rights and national treatment provisions - that is , the super investor rights - in which compensation is asked not only for lost profits but also for all future profits . 
of course , this case is to be heard not in open court but , rather , by a dispute settlement panel . 
in view of the recent decision of a NAFTA panel in the case of an American company against the Mexican government , also involving super investor rights , is the Canadian government prepared to fight this Sunbelt case to the finish ? 
i ask this question because , in the unfortunate instance of MMT , the government capitulated to Ethyl Corporation and settled for about $ 20 million . 
the case was never heard and the government conceded that the Ethyl Corporation had a right to that compensation . 
could the leader give us some indication of whether the government is preparing to fight this case to the end in view of that precedent ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , obviously the matter has become a question of some contest in the dispute settling mechanism . 
i shall raise that issue with the minister to determine the current state of affairs . 
bearing in mind that , if the matter is in litigation or in the middle of a dispute settlement mechanism , the response may be very brief . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , this matter is before an international trade dispute settlement panel . 
this is not an open court and it is not a transparent procedure . 
people in Canada know nothing about it . 
this is a matter of great public interest . 
that is why I raise the question here . 
the previous trade minister , Sergio Marchi , certainly made every effort to open up the process under the dispute settlement mechanism . 
it is important for the Canadian public to know , in this instance , whether the super investment rights of U.S. investors are higher than the rights of Canadians and whether this process will obligate the government not only to pay damages for lost profits but also for all future profits . 
this is a huge case . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the fundamental issue is the government ' s position respecting the export of bulk water . 
i assume that the honourable senator is fully in support of that position , namely , that bulk water should not be exported from this country . 
we have made great progress in that particular area , as I am sure the honourable senator would agree . 
the particular case Senator Spivak refers to , may be one of the outcomes of that progress . 
however , it would be unwise at this stage to discuss in detail what the government ' s strategy or course of action might be , particularly in this case in which an American company is claiming a huge amount of money . 
government Policy on Defending Against Suits by Corporations 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , if that is the case and the leader cannot disclose details , it is important to know whether , in this instance , the government is prepared to go to the dispute settlement process . 
surely , that could be made public . 
i would hope the government would not settle with the company , as they did in the MMT case . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am sure the Government of Canada will be anxious and ready to protect our interests following advice from people who are working with them . 
i am unaware of precisely what their course of action will be . 
it would be unwise to indicate that position at this time . 
clearly , on the matter of principle , the government has taken a strong position against the export of bulk water . 
the federal government has received cooperation from the provinces in those areas . 
we have achieved a national policy and we will defend it in any manner that is appropriate . 
the government remains committed to that defence . 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to ensure certainty in our procedures . 
rule 56 ( 3 ) of the Rules of the Senate addresses the matter of the giving of a notice : 
notice under this rule may be given by one Senator for any other Senator ... 
senator Hays gave notice of a motion on behalf of the Speaker pro tempore . 
rule 56 ( 3 ) says that a senator may act for another senator not then present with the permission of the senator who is absent . 
rule 55 ( 3 ) provides that where the Speaker wishes to participate in the debate , the Speaker will take his or her place , and another senator will occupy the Chair . 
the senator who is also the speaker is then able to fully participate in the debate like any other senator . 
i should think the same applies for the Speaker pro tempore . 
the proper way to have handled the matter in question would have been for the Speaker pro tempore to have taken her seat , and another senator to have occupied the Chair , thereby complying with both rule 56 ( 3 ) , and the logic of speaking as outlined in rule 55 . 
what we heard from the Speaker in the ruling yesterday is what we must rely on . 
i shall not object to the validity of the proceeding that has progressed , but in the future , perhaps it should be done according to the rules . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the Deputy Leader of the Opposition raising this matter . 
i must say that I did not make the request for leave to put the motion in full knowledge of the rules , but , as I listened to him , I concluded that he is correct , had I been moving the motion in the name of the Speaker pro tempore . 
i tried to build into my comments the reason why I was making the motion , as it related to a request of the Speaker pro tempore , which perhaps should not have been mentioned . 
i would have to examine the record to see exactly what I said . 
however , what I was trying to do was request leave and then put the motion myself . 
i am not a member of the joint committee , and I did refer to the Speaker pro tempore , who is a member . 
i understand they will be holding their first meeting next Tuesday , which is the reason for the initiative . 
i understand what Senator Kinsella has said , and in future I shall bear it in mind . 
i thank him for not objecting or withholding leave , because that motion will , of course , facilitate the work of the committee 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lewis , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , electronic commerce is a subject upon which I have a profound interest . 
therefore , I am pleased to add my voice to the debate on second reading of Bill C - 6 , to implement the Personal Information , Protection and Electronic Documents Act . 
this bill is designed to protect the privacy of personal information , gathered , used or disclosed in the course of commercial activity by certain Canadian organizations . 
it also contains initiatives to recognize secure electronic signatures for use in electronic transactions with government and deals with clarification of how courts will assess the reliability of electronic documents entered as evidence in the courts . 
this is legislation that Canada desperately needs in order to facilitate our successful participation in the evolving , global , knowledge - based economy , an economy that the experts on this subject are predicting is set to explode with activity in less than a year . 
the problem , and I repeat the phrase used by Senator Murray , is that Bill C - 6 " does not cut it . " 
as drafted , this bill is an extremely confusing and fundamentally flawed piece of legislation . 
it is questionable as to whether it can effectively protect the privacy of Canadians and at the same time help to ease their successful participation in the worldwide arena of electronic commerce . 
this is an uncertainty that Canada cannot afford to have if we intend to remain a competitive force in the global economy . 
bill C - 6 is the product of a government whose past procrastination is now forcing them to hastily develop laws that will protect Canadians in the face of the coming boom in e - commerce . 
the government has dragged its heels and must now play catch - up with our two major trading partners , the United States and the European Union , which have already developed and implemented legislative policies regarding electronic commerce and protection of personal privacy . 
we are all aware of the claims that e - commerce will change the way that Canada does business . 
canada is a world leader in information technology . 
however , statistics reveal that business interests in this country appear reluctant to use the powerful economic engine that e - commerce provides . 
according to a survey conducted by Angus Reid last spring , Canadian businesses have been slow to capitalize on electronic commerce opportunities , notwithstanding that we have 12.9 million Canadians on line . 
the survey indicated that while 90 per cent of Canadian on - line shoppers consciously looked for sites , only 38 per cent actually conduct on - line transactions with Canadian countries . 
this leads one to wonder which companies are profiting from the purchasing power of 62 per cent of Canadian on - line shoppers and in what countries are they located ? 
unlike their Canadian counterparts , American businesses have embraced the electronic commerce revolution . 
small , specialized companies and industry giants such as Procter & Gamble , for example , are spearheading major commercial initiatives that are set to use e - commerce technology to optimize the services they have available to consumers . 
in comparison , Canadian companies are lagging behind the Americans in this area . 
this imbalance has the potential to give the United States , our largest trading partner and economic competitor , a monopoly on e - commerce when the boom finally hits this country . 
we are facing the risk of losing huge revenues to American competitors as a result of the slow response from the private sector and government . 
bill C - 6 in its present form will only serve to aggravate the situation , and I will explain why that is so . 
this bill unduly restricts the legitimate activities of small and medium - sized businesses and will establish a new , restrictive , regulatory framework without a cost - impact study . 
it also raises the spectre of a new round of federal - provincial battles , as both the Governments of Quebec and Ontario oppose it . 
another problem is that Bill C - 6 applies to commercial organizations , but it is not clear whether it applies to non - profit organizations or professions such as law and medicine . 
for example , it is unclear if this legislation could be applied to a physician ' s records . 
these are only a few of the reasons why Bill C - 6 , if it is passed in its present form , may seriously hinder the e - commerce initiatives of Canadian businesses . 
if this bill serves to restrict the progress of the Canadian private sector in e - commerce development , there is a potential for foreign companies to gain a significant competitive edge in this country . 
the very nature of electronic commerce allows foreign companies to remain exempt from our federal and provincial regulations , and yet still have the ability to profit from commercial transactions with Canadian customers . 
this could have devastating effects on the private sector , our economy , and ultimately our consumers . 
i am persuaded by Senator Murray ' s logic that Bill C - 6 is really two bills in one . 
the controversial Part 1 of this bill , which protects the personal information collected in the course of any type of commercial activity , represents one principle or purpose . 
parts 2 to 5 are concerned with the validation of electronic documents and processes under the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , and are focussed on another principle altogether . 
it seems to me that the idea of splitting Bill C - 6 would assist honourable senators and the committee in our study of it , thereby allowing us to give a separate and thorough examination to the two themes and principles that currently exist within this one bill . 
parts 2 to 5 were quickly reviewed and practically forgotten in the House of Commons because of the debate generated in response to Part 1 . 
now the Senate has the opportunity to provide a careful analysis as to the feasibility of these proposed groundbreaking sections that will assist in establishing electronic commerce in this country and give clear legal status to certain electronic documents . 
it is important that the committee be afforded the opportunity to consider these clauses carefully in their study . 
this legislation is long overdue and urgently required . 
as for Part 1 , every aspect of the privacy provisions in this bill must be looked at in depth . 
the committee should not feel rushed or pressured in their study , no matter how rapidly the government may desire to see this bill pass through the Senate . 
the protection of privacy is a fundamental right for all Canadians , and we are in definite need of legislation in this area . 
in the last session of Parliament , the House of Commons Standing Committee on Industry carried out an extensive study of the predecessor bill , Bill C - 54 . 
they heard from many concerned citizens , experts and organizations who gave evidence to the importance of having strong and effective legislation relating to privacy and e - commerce in Canada . 
among these groups was the Canadian Medical Association , who opposed the bill on the basis that , as it was developed to regulate information use and disclosure for commercial purposes , it could have a negative impact on health care and the health system . 
recently , other health associations and individual health practitioners have phoned , e - mailed , written and faxed my office to express their concerns over Bill C - 6 . 
the Canadian Dental Association informed me that this bill : 
... research using non - identifiable information would be difficult if individual consents had to be obtained for use of each individual ' s information . 
Dr. David Zitner , Director of Medical Informatics at my former alma mater , Dalhousie University in Halifax , contacted me to speak specifically on this same point . 
he said : 
... a tradition in Canada has been to use personal information for public good ( with appropriate protections for privacy and confidentiality . ) 
census activities are one example where people might be compelled to provide private information for public benefit . 
Dr. Zitner believes that it is essential that pertinent legislation ensures that health organizations , governments and research institutes can use information collected for care to support research and quality improvement activities , with appropriate protections for security , privacy and confidentiality . 
this means that research organizations and health institutions would be able to use and report aggregate information . 
the Canadian Bar Association also has concerns about Bill C - 6 . 
in their presentation to the House of Commons Committee on Industry , they stated that there are three main problems in Part 1 of the bill . 
first , the structure of Part 1 is unusual in Canadian law and not entirely successful . 
the standard is structured and intended as a set of guidelines to be implemented by an organization rather than a legally binding code creating specific rights and obligations . 
second , the bar detected the distinct possibility that certain procedural concerns will arise from the role and responsibility of the Privacy Commissioner . 
in order to strike the desired balance between individual rights and the development of electronic commerce , the government must ensure that the public authority charged with the enforcement of Part 1 has the resources to do the job effectively . 
at the same time , the government must ensure that the protection of individual privacy is not achieved by means where they themselves may unduly intrude on the privacy of organizations and the people who work in them , as this would be an abuse of their own procedural rights and make the law seem unjust . 
the Senate committee must do some substantial repair work to clarify this conundrum . 
third , the bar association stated that the bill raises constitutional issues , both with respect to the division of powers between the federal and provincial governments and with respect to the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
the legislation is so ambiguous that the Canadian bar could not come to a final conclusion as to whether or not the federal government would be successful in exercising its powers under this bill . 
ultimately , the association was unsure if the bill could stand the test of a court challenge . 
the final position taken by the bar was that the problems in Part 1 of the bill dealing with structure , procedures and constitutional issues must be addressed before it is enacted , as they have the potential to lead to difficulties in interpretation that will ultimately undermine the importance of this legislation . 
honourable senators , it is imperative that we in this house of sober , second thought meet this challenge and do what the government did not do - work to address and correct the flaws in Bill C - 6 . 
the luxury of time is gone . 
the price we will pay in adopting a " wait and see " or " fix it later " approach in implementing e - commerce legislation is just too high . 
the boom is almost upon us , and Canada cannot afford to be caught unprepared . 
he wanted to share his thoughts on this subject as a citizen of Atlantic Canada and as vice - president of operations for the Information Technology Institute , ITI , one of the most prestigious information technology training centres for university graduates in North America . 
Mr. Cameron informed me that the migration to the United States of highly trained , university - educated Canadians is a definite reality and is on an increase in the information technology sector . 
this situation has become a subject of personal conflict for him . 
as an educator , Mr. Cameron is pleased to see his students snapped up by high - tech companies offering exciting jobs with excellent salaries . 
as a Canadian citizen and a taxpayer , he is not so pleased to see that the majority of these recruiters are from companies in the United States . 
American companies are so eager to hire as many information technology graduates as they can that some have begun to offer ITI students jobs before they have even finished their training . 
i took special note of Mr. Cameron ' s increasing unease over the fact that a growing number of ITI students who have focused their studies on electronic commerce are being actively courted by several American companies . 
once these individuals graduate , it is rare that they remain in this country , and he believes we have already lost a significant number of Canadian - trained , e - commerce experts to the United States . 
America is already way ahead of us in the development and implementation of strategies to ensure profit from the global knowledge - based economy . 
the lack of response from the Canadian private sector towards e - commerce , teamed with the government ' s restrictive taxation and student loan repayment policies is working to the benefit of American companies . 
we are not on a level playing field with the Americans , and it will be very difficult for us to compete with them in e - commerce areas . 
bill C - 6 , which is modelled after the directive implemented by the European Union , and which is in opposition to the current U.S. approach , will only make this situation worse . 
the need for privacy legislation to protect the personal information of Canadians is necessary in order to secure public acceptance of electronic commerce . 
it is also needed to permit this new economic engine to thrive on national and global levels . 
bill C - 6 will not assist in achieving these goals . 
honourable senators , we simply cannot afford to pass Bill C - 6 as it is currently drafted . 
the opportunity is here for us to fix this bill so it will protect the privacy of Canadians while , at the same time , allowing our private sector to thrive and remain competitive , not only with our biggest trading partner but with the rest of the world . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Keon , debate adjourned . 
national Defence Act DNA Identification Act Criminal Code 
bill to amend - Second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Fraser , seconded by the Honourable Senator Ruck , for the second reading of Bill S - 10 , to amend the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification act and the Criminal Code . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , before beginning my speech , I wish to thank the Solicitor General of Canada for taking into account the points I raised during consideration of Bill C - 25 , to amend the National Defence Act to make consequential amendments to other Acts and Bill C - 3 , respecting DNA identification and to make consequential amendments to the Criminal Code and other Acts , prior to the drafting of Bill S - 10 . 
these bills were passed during the first session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
i am pleased to note that the minister also took into consideration the recommendations in the sixteenth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs on Bill C - 3 with respect to the legislative amendments needed to improve management of the national DNA data bank and ensure greater respect for Canadians ' privacy . 
honourable senators , I am pleased to speak today in favour of Bill S - 10 , to amend the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code . 
its purpose is to include in the national DNA data bank , created through the adoption of Bill C - 3 , in December 1998 , DNA profiles of offenders sentenced under the military justice system . 
as you know , the provisions of the legislation now apply only to offenders sentenced in civilian courts . 
since its introduction into Canada in 1988 , DNA analysis for medical and legal purposes has made it possible to convict those who commit violent crimes , as well as release individuals wrongfully convicted by the courts . 
this powerful criminal investigation instrument was introduced in two stages . 
first , in 1995 , amendments were made to the Criminal Code to allow DNA samples to be taken following the issue of a warrant in order to facilitate the conduct of certain police investigations and the identification of suspects . 
then , in September 1997 , Bill C - 3 was introduced in the House of Commons . 
its purpose was to lay the initial groundwork for the structure and administration of a national DNA data bank . 
this new legislation was the second stage of the government ' s initiative . 
it would establish a national bank containing the DNA profiles of persons found guilty of serious and violent crimes , and DNA samples found on the sites of unsolved crimes . 
the data bank should be operational by June 2000 and will be administered by the RCMP , which now runs six forensic laboratories . 
honourable senators , although I supported the reasons leading to the passage of Bill C - 3 , I , nevertheless , noted following an in - depth study of this new legislation that the departments of the Solicitor General and the Minister of Justice had forgotten to include the DNA profiles of the military personnel sentenced for serious and violent offences , as is the case for individuals found guilty of such crimes in civilian courts . 
on October 6 , 1998 , Arthur Eggleton , the Minister of Defence , testified before the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs to introduce the provisions of Bill C - 25 . 
as its aim was to reform the military justice system , I asked the minister whether military personnel charged or found guilty under the new law would be subject to the provisions in Bill C - 3 . 
at the time , I also asked the minister which of the RCMP or the military police would be responsible for taking DNA samples and keeping them in the case of offences involving the military . 
honourable senators , these questions were very important because , according to the provisions of Bill C - 25 , sexual crimes committed by the military were henceforth to be dealt with by the military courts . 
in addition , the Minister of Justice , Anne McLellan , had already justified the establishment of a DNA data bank to give the police greater efficiency and the ability to arrest repeat killers and sexual offenders more quickly . 
nevertheless , the Minister and the officers of National Defence were unable to answer these questions . 
brigadier - General J . Pitzul of the Canadian Army stated that he did not know whether Bill C - 3 should apply to Army and National Defence personnel , even though he had met with Department of Justice officials on the reform of the military justice system . 
this was a very significant omission in the bill given that Bill C - 25 was to make the administration of justice within the Canadian Armed Forces more transparent . 
in that sense , it was unacceptable for military personnel to enjoy special status by being excluded from the application of the provisions contained in the new DNA Identification Act . 
this is particularly true considering that , over the past few years , several scandals involving sexual assault and aggravated assault by Canadian military personnel participating in missions abroad have made the headlines in our country . 
these incidents have tarnished the reputations of the Canadian Army and of its justice system in the eyes of the public . 
the structure of our society , and of our law , requires consistency . 
all are equal before the law . 
everyone has the same rights , but also the same obligations . 
at the time , committee members did not deem appropriate to amend Bill C - 25 to subject military personnel to the provisions on the DNA data bank . 
honourable senators , when we reviewed Bill C - 3 in committee , I again raised that issue with the Solicitor General of Canada , who was responsible for the new legislation . 
first , I wanted to know if his department agreed with what the Minister of National Defence and Canadian Forces officers had stated . 
second , I was hoping the minister would tell me that he had taken their evidence into account in amending Bill C - 3 . 
the answer to both questions was no . 
during the committee proceedings , I also expressed serious reservations about the effectiveness and clarity of certain provisions of the bill which were supposed to ensure , among other things , that DNA samples and profiles would not be used for purposes other than those provided for in the act , namely for criminal investigation purposes , and that the right to privacy of those who had to provide DNA samples would be protected . 
i also questioned the fact that , under the bill , DNA profiles in the " crime scene index " and in the " convicted offenders index " would no longer be accessible when an investigation was not conclusive , when an individual was no longer considered to be a suspect , or when the court issued a verdict of acquittal or found the accused to be not guilty . 
in my opinion , these profiles , in spite of what RCMP scientists claimed , should be destroyed to reduce the risk that they might be used for purposes other than those prescribed in the act . 
in December 1998 , the sixteenth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs recognized the urgent need to establish a national DNA data bank that would allow the country ' s police forces to fully take advantage of the recent technological advances in this area , so as to enhance public safety . 
the report therefore recommended that the federal government strengthen the legislative provisions with respect to administration of the DNA data bank and the safety of the information it contained . 
in order to address these concerns and thus allow passage of Bill C - 3 in order to authorize the immediate establishment of the DNA data bank , the Solicitor General of Canada , Lawrence MacAulay undertook , during his appearance before the committee on December 7 , 1998 , to introduce , during the anticipated 18 - month interval between Royal Assent and the coming into force of Bill C - 3 , a new bill that would make it possible to extend the jurisdiction of the DNA data bank to offenders found guilty under the military justice system ; to require the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to report on the operation of the DNA data bank in his annual report to the minister before it was tabled in Parliament ; to include in the new bill a requirement for a parliamentary review every five years in order to reassure committee members with respect to the very sensitive nature of the information that will be in the DNA data bank and the rapid evolution of technology in this field ; and to give Senate and House of Commons committees the same right of review every five years as is contained in the new bill . 
it is important to mention that all of this can be found in the committee ' s sixteenth report . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 10 was drafted to reflect certain points raised in the committee report . 
in my opinion , this is the third stage in the federal legislation relating to the use of DNA identification for the purposes of criminal investigations . 
yet the Solicitor General asked that the bill be introduced in the Senate before going to the House , so that senators might ensure that all areas of concern be properly dealt with by your Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
now , having given the background to this bill , I would like to address the matter of the amendments proposed in Bill S - 10 . 
under the new bill , as I said at the start of my speech , the genetic profiles of persons subject to the Code of Service Discipline who are found guilty of serious offences involving violence will be included in the DNA data bank . 
this code applies to military personnel , members of the Reserve and certain civilians accompanying military personnel overseas . 
under the provisions of Bill S - 10 , military judges are authorized to : first , order offenders subject to the Code of Military Discipline convicted of a designated offence to provide samples of bodily substances for the purpose of the DNA bank , under the schedule to the DNA Identification Act , and , second , to issue DNA warrants in the investigation of designated offences committed by a person who is subject to the Code of Service Discipline , both in Canada and abroad . 
at the present time the military police are authorized to obtain a DNA warrant only in the case of offences committed in Canada . 
the fact that the military police are now authorized to obtain warrants for designated offences committed outside the country is a marked improvement , when we consider that in excess of 4,000 military personnel are serving in 27 missions abroad , and that serious incidents involving Canadian military personnel have occurred in Somalia and Bosnia - Herzegovina . 
as is the case with the current provisions of the DNA Identification Act , Bill S - 10 provides that the samples and the results of analyses will be transmitted to the RCMP Commissioner for filing in the data bank . 
the new act also provides that the provisions to be included in the National Defence Act concerning the authority to approve the taking of DNA samples , the handling and storage of samples , the results of DNA analyses , and the guarantees regarding the protection of privacy will be identical to those found in the DNA Identification Act . 
however , these provisions have been adapted to the context of the military justice system . 
it is to be noted that the DNA Identification Act includes a list of designated offences and provides that an individual found guilty of one of these offences may be required to provide a DNA sample for the purpose of forensic DNA analysis . 
the list is divided in two types of offences : primary and secondary . 
in the case of primary designated offences , samples must be taken when the person is found guilty , except under exceptional circumstances . 
this type of offence includes those that involve violence or that are of a sexual nature , and for which evidence based on DNA profiles can be particularly useful . 
these offences include incest , sexual exploitation , murder , manslaughter , assault with a weapon or causing bodily harm , causing bodily harm with intent , sexual assault , aggravated sexual assault , kidnapping and forcible confinement . 
in the case of secondary designated offences , the taking of samples is not compulsory . 
however , the Crown must convince the judge that the taking of such samples is in the interest of public safety . 
these are less serious offences for which DNA analyses cannot always be used to solve a crime or prevent other ones . 
these offences include using explosives , piratical acts , assault , breaking and entering with intent , arson , causing death by criminal negligence , assaulting a peace officer , robbery and hostage taking . 
under Bill S - 10 , this list , which defines the situations where DNA samples can be taken , will now apply to military personnel who are found guilty of such offences . 
first , the new law would change certain parts of the DNA Identification Act to take into account changes to the National Defence Act . 
in addition , clause 12 of the bill provides that , within the five years following the act ' s coming into force , a committee of the Senate or of the House of Commons or a joint committee will review the provisions and the operation of the act . 
this same clause provides that a report shall be tabled annually on the operations of the data bank by the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
it shall be tabled before each House of Parliament within the first 15 days of sitting of each house and following its reception . 
these changes will respond to the concerns of the committee members by giving Parliament the means to better oversee and monitor the administration of the data bank . 
finally , the law is changed by Bill S - 10 so it may be made clear that the DNA profiles and bodily substances taken to establish them may be used for nothing but identification purposes in criminal investigations . 
honourable senators , I want to point out that Bill S - 10 also includes a number of technical amendments to further clarify certain aspects of the Criminal Code with respect to the application of the DNA Identification Act . 
these changes were proposed following the creation of a federal - provincial task force to establish the new DNA data bank . 
following a number of meetings , provincial officials in the public security and justice sectors stated that the current law was not clear enough as regards the circumstances under which a judge need not order a DNA sample . 
bill S - 10 responds to these concerns by setting out clearly that a sample need not be ordered if the court is advised that the DNA profile of the person in question is already in the DNA data bank . 
bill S - 10 also makes provision for a provincial court judge to authorize the execution of an order to obtain a DNA sample made or issued in another province . 
finally , this bill makes several other technical amendments to the Criminal Code to clarify and strengthen the system for the taking of bodily substances for forensic DNA analysis . 
in closing , honourable senators , I am happy once again to note that , thanks to the vigilance of members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code will , in my view , and I am sure you will agree , be greatly enhanced by Bill S - 10 as it relates to the concerns of this house regarding the establishment and management of the new national DNA data bank . 
as I said at the beginning of my speech , this is an extremely powerful tool with important repercussions for our justice system and our society . 
the provisions of Bill S - 10 will ensure greater respect for the privacy of Canadians by setting clearer guidelines for the police and the courts regarding the use of DNA profiles in criminal investigations . 
i can assure you that the bill will be seriously considered in committee in order to ensure that it responds to the concerns expressed by members in this house one year ago . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , if no other senator wishes to speak , I will proceed with the motion . 
the Honourable Senator Fraser , seconded by the Honourable Senator Ruck moved the second reading of the bill . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Fraser , bill referred to Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . - ( 
honourable Senator Lavoie - Roux ) 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , legislation affecting the issues of life and death demand the deepest reflection of parliamentarians . 
thus , I have examined with great care Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . 
i have consulted leading ethicists , including the Catholic Health Association of Canada and the Care - in - Dying Coalition / Canadian Coalition Against Euthanasia , which comprises 30 organizations across Canada , advocating compassionate , just and respectful care for people who are dying . 
also , I bring my own experience to the consideration of this bill . 
in my personal life , I have had to make decisions and recommendations concerning the extension of medical treatment for loved ones who were dying . 
i know personally how agonizing the decision - making process can be for health care providers , as well as for family members . 
in addition , it is important in such a legislative debate to state one ' s own personal convictions - that is , what one brings to the debate . 
i bring a deep conviction of the inherent dignity and value of the human person . 
i believe all human beings are to be respected at every stage of life , from conception to death . 
in brief , honourable senators , I oppose euthanasia and assisted suicide as incompatible with human dignity . 
however , I also recognize the legal rights of patients to refuse treatment and strongly support the need for widespread availability of adequate palliative care to control and relieve suffering . 
sickness , suffering and dying are an inevitable part of human experience . 
dying can be a time of deeper self - awareness in which people freely and consciously affirm the meaning of their lives and not merely an inevitable process to which they must passively submit . 
at the same time , advances in science and medical technology are dramatically improving our ability to cure illness , ease suffering and prolong life . 
these advances also raise ethical questions that society has never had to face . 
there are occasions when prolonging life by artificial means places onerous burdens on the dying person and his or her family . 
it is necessary to maintain a balance between two important obligations : the obligation not to intentionally kill someone and the obligation not to use life - sustaining procedures that would impose burdens out of proportion with the benefits to be gained from the procedure . 
in this light , I find both positive and negative aspects in Bill S - 2 . 
i support the intent of the bill , which is to clarify the distinctions surrounding end - of - life decisions , especially the withholding and withdrawing of treatment when appropriate and the proper use of medications to alleviate pain . 
it is both legal and moral for a health care provider to administer medication to alleviate the physical pain of a person suffering from a life - threatening condition , even if such medication might shorten the life of the person , provided that it is not the intention to cause death . 
since the Senate has been informed that some health care providers are reluctant to provide sufficient pain control medication because of a fear they may be held criminally liable , the bill provides a positive step . 
the inclusion in the bill of a clause recommending that Health Canada establish national guidelines for the withholding and withdrawing of treatment , further promote and train professionals in controlling pain and palliative care , and conduct research that monitors frequency , is a further welcome step . 
having established the need to protect health care providers who sincerely want to alleviate the pain of their patients , we must ensure that this legislation , if passed , does not open the door to direct , legalized euthanasia . 
that is the concern expressed by the Campaign Life Coalition , which sees this bill as a first step toward creating a demand for assisted suicide . 
honourable senators , here is the dilemma we face as legislators . 
how can be we be sure the medical treatment is intended to alleviate pain , even though it may shorten life ? 
how can we be sure a patient is not coerced into accepting such medical treatment ? 
will such treatment become common in cases that are not life threatening ? 
are we , in short , weakening the integrity of life , which , as legislators , we must uphold , through our legitimate desire to ease pain ? 
these are questions that need a thorough airing by the Senate committee that would examine this bill if it passes second reading . 
in my view , the bill should go forward . 
the issue deserves our best effort to write good legislation for the benefit of all Canadians . 
although this bill does not amend the Criminal Code , it is my understanding that the bill is not intended to weaken the Criminal Code ' s prohibition of euthanasia and assisted suicide . 
however , the bill as presently drafted does not give us sufficient assurance that this is the case . 
this issue requires further probing and thought . 
it should be specified that the person the bill is talking about in clause 2 is a person " for whom death is imminent and unavoidable . " 
it is not good enough to leave a person undefined , as clause 2 presently does . 
if it is the intention of the bill to ease the pain of a person in a life - threatening condition , let the bill state this clearly . 
at committee stage , I will propose the appropriate amendment for clause 2 , with consequential amendments to follow . 
honourable senators , it should be remembered also that there are life - threatening situations that are not associated with imminent and unavoidable death . 
many conditions are chronic and long - term , but not necessarily life threatening . 
a diabetic who goes into diabetic shock faces a life - threatening condition , but death is neither imminent nor unavoidable . 
as well , a person who might be termed " terminal " , suffering a chronic or deteriorating condition , is not in a life - threatening situation in the way that the bill should make clear . 
for now , I want to assert the principle that a person who is suffering from the imminent and unavoidable threat of death is entitled to pain relief , and the doctor or nurse who provides that relief is entitled to be free of prosecution . 
however , we must not open the door to the direct practice of euthanasia . 
we must ensure that there can be no misinterpretation of the true intent of the bill . 
i call on the Senate to be diligent in this matter . 
senator Carstairs , in replying to the question I addressed to her when she opened debate on second reading , quoted from the Catechism of the Catholic Church as follows : 
even if death is thought imminent , the ordinary care owed to a sick person cannot be legitimately interrupted . 
the use of painkillers to alleviate the sufferings of the dying , even at the risk of shortening their days , can be morally in conformity with human dignity if death is not willed as either an end or a means ... 
that quotation , honourable senators , is helpful , but let us remember that the quotation is prefaced by the statement that : 
whatever its motives and means , direct euthanasia consists in putting an end to the lives of handicapped , sick , or dying persons . 
it is morally unacceptable . 
i am hopeful that , acting together , the Senate can write legislation that helps maintain both the dignity and rights of a patient whose death is imminent and unavoidable and the professional standards of a health care provider . 
honourable senators , this bill also gives us the opportunity to strengthen support for palliative care programs in Canada . 
good palliative care is aimed at relief of suffering and improving the quality of life of persons who are living with or dying from advanced illness . 
let us strengthen this growing need in Canada . 
on motion of Senator Roche , for Senator Lavoie - Roux , debate adjourned . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
motion Requesting Authority to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator Di Nino : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee , when and if it is formed , for its present study of Bill S - 6 . - ( 
honourable Senator Cools ) 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I believe that Senator Oliver is around somewhere , available to speak to this matter . 
i had indicated that I would yield to Senator Oliver . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , in the absence of Senator Oliver and given the hour , I suggest that the matter be stood until he is available . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , shall we stand this matter in the name of Senator Oliver ? 
i wish to move the adjournment , then , in his name . 
an Hon. Senator : 
No. 
senator Cools : 
someone has to do something with this matter or else it will collapse . 
an Hon. Senator : 
put it in your name , then . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , the matter cannot be dealt with because Senator Oliver is not here . 
senator Cools wishes to stand the matter . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I think Senator Oliver ' s leadership explained to him very carefully my understanding that I was yielding the floor to him . 
order stands . 
committee Authorized to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
hon. Joan Fraser , pursuant to notice of November 17 , 1999 , moved : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill C - 69 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee for its present study of Bill C - 7 . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 , at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 10 
Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 
the Honourable Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Speaker Pro tempore 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Laurence Decore 
the Late Delia Grey 
reviewing Canada ' s Foreign Policy 
fifth Anniversary of Report of Special Joint Committee 
policy of Former Soviet Union on Forcing Ukrainian Farmers into Agricultural Collectives 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
adjournment 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
first Reading 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on May 21 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on June 18 and from June 21 to 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting from September 20 to 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on August 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
agriculture and Forestry 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Present State and Future of Agriculture 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Present State and Future of Forestry 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services and Travel 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
aboriginal Peoples 
royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples - Notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Recommendations Respecting Aboriginal Governance and to Apply Papers and Evidence of Previous Session to Current Study 
question PERIOD 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate - Subject Matter of Meetings 
labour 
plight of the Homeless - Government Policy 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Clarification by Supreme Court of Its Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development 
maritime Provinces - Clarification by Supreme Court of Its Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Comments by Minister 
foreign Affairs 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Government Policy on Human Security Agenda versus Interests of Investors 
finance 
government Policy on Raising Interest Rates 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions on Referendum - Government Position 
national Defence 
1994 White Paper - Government Policy 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
veterans Affairs 
study of Health Facilities - Influence of Senate Subcommittee Report 
foreign Affairs 
Kosovo - Government Aid 
pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
motion to Authorize Committee to Study Developments Respecting Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide - Debate Adjourned 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Study State of Domestic and International Financial System 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker pro tempore in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Late Laurence Decore 
the Late Delia Grey 
hon. Thelma J . Chalifoux : 
Delia Grey was born in northern Alberta in 1917 , but raised in the St. Albert area . 
Laurence Decore was born in Vegreville , Alberta in 1940 , and was raised in Vegreville , Ottawa and Edmonton . 
these two leaders followed different paths , but each , in their own way , contributed to the betterment of aboriginal people and the newcomers who came to this country to follow their dreams . 
Laurence was a loyal member of the Liberal Party of Alberta and Canada who fought for the right and opportunity of all people to be included in our Canadian mosaic . 
Delia was a loyal and dedicated citizen of the M é tis Nation and Canada who worked tirelessly for the M é tis and First Nations people so that they , too , could follow their dreams and be a part of the Canadian mosaic . 
the many challenges these two individuals faced with courage are too numerous to mention in this statement , but I stand before you , honourable senators , to attest not only to the changes that came about because of the work of these individuals , but also to their lives of dedication and service to their fellow Canadians . 
their wisdom , kindness and generosity will be missed by all whose lives they touched , but the legacy that they left us will live on in our children and in our history . 
we should celebrate their lives and how we have been blessed to have known them both . 
they will be missed . 
reviewing Canada ' s Foreign Policy 
fifth Anniversary of Report of Special Joint Committee 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , this month marks the fifth anniversary of the tabling of the final report by the Joint Committee on Canada ' s Foreign Policy . 
this report contained close to fifty recommendations on such broad issues as the contribution to sustainable development , reinforcement of common security and the renewal of international aid . 
i wrote the Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy , on November 2 , requesting an update and report on the concrete steps taken by his department since the tabling of this report . 
i have as yet received no reply , but it would appear that fiscal consolidation has led to a considerable reduction in Canada ' s foreign aid to the developing countries . 
whereas the committee recommended stabilization of government assistance to development at the level of 0.7 per cent of the GDP , that ratio has dropped from 0.45 per cent to 0.26 per cent between 1991 and fiscal year 1999 - 2000 . 
a second aspect dear to the committee was the promotion and dissemination of Canadian culture and knowledge . 
this was the first serious review of this aspect . 
canada has come across as a kind of poor cousin , given the meagre investments its government has made in this area . 
while awaiting a reply from the minister that will enable me to assess what the Department of External Affairs has done over the past five years , I wished to draw attention to the very serious effort the committee put into this report . 
policy of Former Soviet Union on Forcing Ukrainian Farmers into Agricultural Collectives 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , some 67 years ago , a terrible and very sad event changed the lives of the Ukrainian population forever . 
it was in 1932 and 1933 that Soviet leader Joseph Stalin , in an effort to force millions of independent Ukrainian farmers into collectivized Soviet agriculture , adopted , in his demonical ways , several tactics to install a political famine . 
measures were adopted such as raising Ukraine ' s grain procurement quotas by 44 per cent to create a drastic grain shortage , resulting in the inability of Ukrainian peasants to feed themselves ; implementing an international passport system to restrict movements of Ukrainians travelling in search of food ; killing anyone caught taking or hiding grain from a collective farm ; persecuting thousands of Ukrainian intellectuals , writers and leaders ; and attacking , with tanks and artillery , villages inhabited by defenceless farmers . 
those are just a few of the horrible political measures taken by Soviet leader Joseph Stalin and his henchman Lazar Kaganovich to break Ukraine ' s will to resist . 
even though considerable efforts were made to hide or ignore the atrocities of this political famine , factual evidence has been gathered by recognized scholars to estimate the number of victims of the genocide at about 10 million people . 
regrettably , the Western world , during the years of the Soviet Union , did not acknowledge or understand the magnitude of the genocide . 
with the acknowledgement of the present leadership in the Kremlin of this atrocity , it is an event in history that must be understood and commemorated . 
it reads as follows : 
what I saw that morning was inexpressibly horrible . 
they had been trapped and left to starve , each in his own home , by a political decision made in a far - off Capital , around conference and banquet tables . 
there was not even the consolation of inevitability to relieve the horror . 
i know that senators in this chamber actively support the cause of human rights and the dignity and worth of all human beings . 
i therefore encourage you , honourable senators , to join the Ukrainian Canadian Congress and the Canada - Ukraine Parliamentary Friendship Group this evening to commemorate the victims of the Ukrainian famine genocide of 1932 - 33 . 
you will have received notices in your office , but I remind you that the event will take place this evening at 7:30 in room 237 - C , Centre Block . 
i am sure honourable senators will want to take advantage of this opportunity to acknowledge those who died in the famine . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honorable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 4 , to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , November 25 , 1999 . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on May 21 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the first report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association concerning the Canadian delegation to the meeting of the Committee on the Environment , Regional Planning and Local Authorities of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe held in Paris , France , on May 21 , 1999 . 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on June 18 and from June 21 to 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the second report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association concerning the Canadian delegation attending meetings of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly ' s Economic Affairs and Development Committee at the Paris headquarters of the Organization for Economic Co - operation and Development on June 18 and the Parliamentary Assembly ' s plenary session in Strasbourg , France , from June 21 to 25 , 1999 . 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting from September 20 to 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the third report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association concerning the Canadian delegation that attended meetings of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly ' s plenary session in Strasbourg , France , from September 20 to 25 , 1999 . 
council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Meeting on August 25 , 1999 - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the fourth report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association concerning the Canadian delegation that attended the meeting of the Standing Committee of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region held in Murmansk , Russia , on August 25 , 1999 . 
agriculture and Forestry 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Present State and Future of Agriculture 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be authorized to examine the present state and the future of agriculture in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report no later than June 29 , 2001 . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Present State and Future of Forestry 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be authorized to examine the present state and the future of forestry in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report no later than June 29 , 2001 . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services and Travel 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it ; and 
that the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
aboriginal Peoples 
royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples - Notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Recommendations Respecting Aboriginal Governance and to Apply Papers and Evidence of Previous Session to Current Study 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , November 24 , 1999 , I will move : 
that Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report on the recommendations of the " Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples " ( sessional paper 2 / 35 - 508 ) respecting aboriginal governance and , in particular , seek the comments of aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on : 
2 . the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships ; and , 
3 . the models of aboriginal self - government required to respond to the needs of aboriginal peoples and to complement these new structural relationships ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and the work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 16 , 1999 , and that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
question PERIOD 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate - Subject Matter of Meetings 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , my question is to Senator Austin , Chairman of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
in the Journals of the Senate for November 18 , a motion was moved by Senator P é pin for Senator Austin , seconded by Senator Mercier , and I quote from page 128 of the Journals : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders have power to sit at 4:30 p.m. on Tuesdays , even though the Senate may then be sitting , from now until the end of December 1999 , in order for the Committee to deal expeditiously with the questions of privilege ... 
honourable senators , I received an agenda today . 
it was sent out with no name on it , but it is under the heading " Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , " which is scheduled to meet today , November 23 , at 4:30 p.m. The agenda has five items on it , four of which have nothing to do with a question of privilege . 
the authorization given by the Senate was to deal with questions of privilege only , even though the Senate may then be sitting . 
could the chairman explicate this matter and ensure that the Senate instruction is followed in his committee ? 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , the agenda for the committee meeting was issued by the clerk of the committee , and I did not have the opportunity to see it until noon today . 
i provide my assurance to the house that we will deal with the question of privilege submitted by Senator Andreychuk as the first order of business and the question of privilege submitted by Senator Kinsella as the second order of business . 
however , I had hoped that we could take 30 seconds of the business of the committee this afternoon to authorize the waiving of fees with respect to the application of the Moravian Assembly . 
this is an item in which there is no difficulty for any member of our committee . 
the Moravian Assembly paid its fees in the last session and wishes to consider those fees paid . 
the committee will then be free to deal only with the questions of privilege before returning to the house for further direction . 
labour 
plight of the Homeless - Government Policy 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it concerns reports that the cabinet is now looking at a proposal to spend $ 1.2 billion , or $ 200 million per year , to fight homelessness . 
last spring the government gave the Labour Minister a mandate to find a solution , and she was supposed to derive a strategy within a month . 
that was last spring . 
winter will soon be upon us . 
can the government leader advise the Senate as to when exactly cabinet is prepared to move a plan to deal with homelessness and to put it into action ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i thank the honourable senator for that question . 
obviously , this is a problem of serious proportion across the country , one to which the government has given much attention . 
the minister in question has travelled from one end of this country to the other in an effort to bring the government to the people and to receive their views in fulfilment of her mandate . 
as honourable senators will know , in order to deal effectively with the problem , it is very likely that additional resources will be required . 
the determination of those resources will proceed as part of the normal budget process . 
senator Cohen : 
honourable senators , I am well aware of the many miles the minister has travelled across this country . 
i wish to remind honourable senators that the need is now , before the snow flies . 
why is there no plan in place now , in November , to help provide shelter for this winter ? 
senator Boudreau : 
i do not want to leave the impression with honourable senators that there will be no measures coming forward this winter . 
it is my understanding , honourable senators , that at this point it is an important subject , which has been brought forward by the Minister of Labour , and I expect there will be more to announce shortly . 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Clarification by Supreme Court of Its Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate and relates to the Marshall case . 
the minister will recall that there was quite a bit of confusion as a result of the original decision . 
in spite of the clarification , Indian Affairs Minister Robert Nault stands by his contention that the native treaty rights extend to natural resources . 
the Leader of the Government in the Senate will know the consequences of such a decision or position . 
would the minister indicate to this house if this is the government ' s position as well ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as I read the clarification , the court wanted its judgment to apply to the issues at hand and was not prepared to extend its opinion in other directions . 
i do not know that it precluded those other directions . 
the court simply said that this judgment cannot be extrapolated beyond the specific circumstances to which it applies . 
at this point , the government is acting on that judgment , and hopefully ongoing discussions will be assisted by the clarification and will produce positive results . 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development 
maritime Provinces - Clarification by Supreme Court of Its Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Comments by Minister 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate will know that Minister Nault has tried to get himself into the process and raise his profile nationally by perhaps - and I want to choose my words carefully - insinuating himself a little too much . 
given that he has left the impression that cabinet is behind the notion that the ruling extends the right to many other national resources , and given that the minister sits at the cabinet table , he might wish to point out to his cabinet colleagues that this Doug Young clone should be reined in and made to toe the cabinet line . 
difficulties in Atlantic Canada will develop if this clone - and I use the word carefully - continues on this path of destroying Atlantic Canada ' s resources . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I hope Senator Comeau will forgive me if I convey his general feeling in somewhat more moderate terms to the minister . 
i did not hear his comments directly , but perhaps this is what the minister was referring to , that the whole aboriginal issue is wider than one specific resource area . 
i believe that the Supreme Court clarification has proven to be helpful in resolving what is a very immediate issue in the fishery . 
therefore , I look forward to a resolution of the problem as the government representative in the area meets with the various interests in the fishing community , including aboriginal representatives in Atlantic Canada . 
hopefully this can be a precursor to the resolution of other outstanding aboriginal issues . 
foreign Affairs 
Sudan - Involvement of Talisman Energy Inc. - Government Policy on Human Security Agenda versus Interests of Investors 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it is a continuation of a question I asked the honourable minister last week about Talisman Energy Inc. of Calgary . 
as of this morning , continued media coverage of this situation has revealed that Talisman shareholders , specifically a group representing church , pension and investment funds , have been pressing the company for over a year to examine the social and economic implications of their presence in the Sudan . 
in a commentary piece for The Globe and Mail today , Tim Ryan , a Catholic priest and long - time Talisman shareholder , talked about efforts to have the energy company , as well as all corporations in Canada , take on the role of responsible economic actors and adopt a corporate human rights code . 
is the government prepared to protect the interests of Canadian shareholders should the belated fact - finding mission reveal that the presence of Talisman Energy Inc. in the Sudan is directly contributing to human rights abuses in that country ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i certainly undertake to do that . 
in regard to the Government of Canada taking action to protect shareholders , I am not sure what the honourable senator has in mind . 
if he were to give me a little more detail on what he considers appropriate , I would be in a better position to respond . 
senator Oliver : 
in The Globe and Mail article , Mr. Ryan quoted the president of Talisman as saying , " Why us ? " 
in response , Mr. Ryan indicated that a group of the shareholders said that the answer to his question was : 
... that what we ask of Talisman we try systematically to ask of all corporations : a comprehensive code of conduct that includes recognized human rights , social , environmental and labour standards , appropriate benchmarks against which to set such commitments and a credible auditing system to measure corporate performance . 
senator Boudreau : 
with respect to the company itself , I indicated previously to honourable senators that should the investigation confirm serious allegations , then obviously action will be contemplated against the particular company in question or any other company that finds itself in that situation . 
with respect to what specific action might be undertaken by the Government of Canada on behalf of individual shareholders in terms of protecting their financial interests or directing the company to take certain actions respecting the shareholders themselves , I am still unclear as to the honourable senator ' s suggestion . 
senator Oliver : 
the shareholders have said that a number of things they wish to see by way of human rights protection and other protections are already enshrined and embodied in such internationally and universally endorsed covenants as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Geneva conventions , International Labour Organization conventions , and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
they are asking that these conventions and declarations be enforced , to all of which Canada is a signatory . 
senator Boudreau : 
with respect to the actions of any company , we must insist upon certain standards of behaviour . 
the allegations raise serious questions as to whether this company met those standards . 
if they do not meet those standards upon investigation and report , then the government would contemplate action with respect to the company . 
i believe it is perfectly legitimate for the shareholders to proceed with that process . 
whether or not individual shareholders decide to give certain directions to the board , the Government of Canada plans to complete its investigation and will consider appropriate action with respect to the company based on the outcome of that investigation . 
finance 
government Policy on Raising Interest Rates 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , interest rates have slowly moved upwards over the past few months as the Bank of Canada attempts to keep inflation in check . 
six years ago , on September 23 , 1993 , The Globe and Mail reported Liberal Leader Jean Chr é tien as saying that a Liberal government would tell Bank of Canada Governor John Crow to pay greater attention to job creation and not be fixated on inflation . 
asked what he would do if Mr. Crow disagreed , Mr. Chr é tien replied , " I ' m telling you , he ' s an official of the government . " 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the record of this government has been to respect the role of the Governor of the Bank of Canada . 
in so doing , we must commend Governor Thiessen . 
i think he has done a remarkable job in seeking the appropriate balance . 
when events in other parts of the world were flying in all directions , he was able to keep our fiscal course steady and , in fact , helped create an environment which allowed our economy to grow and continue to grow at a remarkable rate . 
our growth rate has been almost without parallel in any of the major industrial countries . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I take it , then , that we should take the Prime Minister ' s comments about the Governor of the Bank of Canada with the same amount of believability as his comments on the GST . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I was not actively involved during the time of Governor Crow , but striking a balance is different in every circumstance . 
determining whether or not an interest rate is appropriate will very much depend on how the economy is performing at the moment . 
if the economy is performing well - that is , if you are in an expansionary period - then , perhaps , a different interest rate to what you might experience in a recession is appropriate . 
the economy has been growing at a rate of almost 4 per cent real growth over the last four quarters , and it is predicted to continue with aggressive growth . 
we have probably the second highest growth of any country in the G - 7 next to the United States , and certainly in the industrial world . 
honourable senators , I cannot comment on the propriety of certain interest rates at certain times . 
i leave that to the Governor of the Bank of Canada . 
i think he is doing a remarkable job . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions on Referendum - Government Position 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
honourable senators , I would like to know the federal government ' s intentions with respect to the holding of the next referendum in Quebec - hoping there will not be one . 
could the minister inform this house of the decisions taken by the federal government in this regard ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , obviously , it is not in the interest of this government to encourage another referendum . 
however , there are certain principles which are generally agreed upon by most Canadians and by members of this government and , probably , by most senators . 
first , should there be a referendum at any time in the future , clarity will be a real issue . 
there must be clarity in terms of the question and in terms of the result . 
in fact , clarity formed an extremely important part of its decision . 
the other element on which most Canadians agree , and , this forms part of the government ' s position , is that the Parliament of Canada should be involved . 
separation is not an issue for any one province . 
it is an issue in which we and other parliamentarians need to be involved . 
the exact mechanics of those principles are a matter of ongoing discussion . 
however , clearly , first , the issue of clarity must be paramount , and second , it is an issue for the Parliament of Canada and the people of Canada and not just for one province . 
senator Rivest : 
when the minister says the Parliament of Canada must be involved , does he mean the House of Commons and the Senate ? 
in his mind and that of the government , is the government ' s involvement in the terms of referendum process itself on the clarity of the question and the majority required ? 
what is the minister ' s opinion ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators will have views to express on their positions , which will be an important part of any such process . 
the Supreme Court has indicated quite clearly that the issues of clarity , as they surround the question and the consequences , are clearly issues in which the federal government and all provincial governments should be involved . 
senator Rivest : 
originally , in the drafting or formulation of the question and in the majority that might be required . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , perhaps on both issues , clarity is important . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I am now hearing something new . 
the minister , on behalf of the government , is telling us that the Parliament of Canada will have a say in the phrasing of the question and in the decision determining the percentages . 
in effect , both Houses of Parliament will contribute to the referendum process should Quebec decide to hold a referendum . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Leader of the Opposition carries my comments a little further than they necessarily apply . 
i said that the Government of Canada must be involved as the Supreme Court directs . 
when I say " the Government of Canada " , I also include the Senate in that description . 
on the question of clarity , I suggest that the Government of Canada and the province in question will be involved in discussions . 
indeed , governments of other provinces that are not directly involved should be part of the discussions . 
the precise nature of how that should be done will probably be determined as we move forward over the next weeks and months . 
however , at this time , I would not be prepared to indicate in detail the precise nature of that involvement . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
with all due respect , the Supreme Court of Canada did not direct the Government of Canada to do anything nor did it give a decision . 
the Supreme Court gave an opinion that went beyond the three questions that were referred to it by the Government of Canada . 
the minister here is stating government policy , which has been discussed and is subject to controversy . 
i am hearing that , to whatever degree , we can expect parliamentary and government intervention in the process leading up to a referendum on the question of Quebec ' s future either within Confederation or outside of it , should it ever be held . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I can assure the honourable senator that the present Government of Canada will not stand by and allow a referendum process to proceed without involvement in , or comment on , the nature of the question . 
national Defence 
1994 White Paper - Government Policy 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
does the defence white paper of 1994 remain the definitive statement on the government ' s position with respect to defence matters ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , if there are specific elements which the senator wishes to confirm as still being policies of the government , I would be happy to get that information for him . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , like my leader , I am reading into the minister ' s statement that there have been changes in the defence policy of Canada which have gone unnoticed . 
i would say modestly that I follow that policy reasonably closely . 
the leader can consult his colleague to his left if he thinks I am joking . 
let us assume then that there have been changes since the policy was released five years ago . 
i quote from pages 46 and 47 of that document : 
work will , therefore , begin immediately to identify options and plans to put into service new affordable replacement helicopters by the end of the decade . 
the end of this decade is five weeks away . 
the white paper was published about five years ago . 
where does Canada stand on the question of helicopter replacement ? 
has the policy been changed ? 
is that not the position of the Government of Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
with respect to the Sea Kings in which the honourable senator is particularly interested , I can only repeat what I have said in the past . 
it remains a top priority for the Minister of Defence . 
he is carrying the file forward , and we hope to have something to report in the near future . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , some time ago the statement - of - requirement stage was completed . 
indeed that stage was completed before the cancellation of the EH - 101 . 
we have now heard that the statement of requirements is at hand . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , we know from information which Honourable Senator Forrestall has brought to the Senate that some work has proceeded on the Sea King replacement program . 
that is further evidence that the Minister of Defence has placed this item at the top of his agenda and will make a final decision as soon as possible . 
as I have indicated , I will communicate any decision to the Senate as soon as I am able to do so . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , the 30 - minute period for questions is now over . 
is there leave to continue , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
veterans Affairs 
study of Health Facilities - Influence of Senate Subcommittee Report 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
earlier this year , the Standing Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs prepared and delivered an exceptionally good report on the health of veterans . 
the report was roundly applauded and supported not only by honourable senators but by others outside this place . 
we now understand that Mr. Baker , Minister of Veterans Affairs , is undertaking a similar study on the same subject . 
is that a reflection of the minister ' s opinion on the fine work done by the Senate committee , or is it just that the department has too much money and it wants to spend more of the taxpayers ' hard - earned dollars on a redundant study ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the minister is well aware of the good work done by the Senate committee . 
presumably that report will form part of the material upon which he will make his necessary decisions . 
obviously , he feels the need to generate a new initiative by his department , but I do not think we can conclude in any way that , in doing so , he does not value the work done by the Senate . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate alludes to the fact that Minister Baker may have seen the Senate report . 
is it a fact that Minister Baker has seen the report and , if not , would the leader ensure that a copy is placed on Minister Baker ' s desk first thing tomorrow morning ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will certainly undertake to speak to Minister Baker in connection with the report . 
if he does not have a copy as yet , I will deliver one to him at the earliest possible moment . 
foreign Affairs 
Kosovo - Government Aid 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
winter will soon arrive in Kosovo as it will here . 
we have spent hundreds of millions of dollars helping to destroy the superstructure in Kosovo . 
starvation , cold and lack of electricity are endangering many people . 
what does the Canadian government intend to do to assist with providing food and warmth to both sides of the conflict in that tormented part of the world ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Government of Canada is committed to assisting in Kosovo with humanitarian aid and economic assistance . 
in fact , the full amount of the assistance recently announced totals approximately $ 180 million . 
on October 30 , $ 65 million worth of assistance was announced to be disbursed through CIDA ; $ 35 million for humanitarian aid , $ 10 million in economic assistance , and then a further $ 20 million as support for emergency peace - building and rehabilitation . 
on November 1 , a further $ 112 million in assistance was announced ; $ 40 million from CIDA ; for economic assistance , $ 15 million ; for supporting a secure environment and building peace through CIDA , $ 25 million ; for community - based rehabilitation , $ 20 million ; and the Canada Regional Training Support Project will get another $ 12 million . 
finally , on November 17 , an additional $ 3.7 million was announced for humanitarian assistance , economic assistance , and the International Organization for Migration . 
we will follow the situation on an ongoing basis . 
senator Taylor : 
honourable senators , is the government considering sending some of our food surpluses , for which our farmers are not receiving adequate compensation , to more needy areas of the world ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , to the best of my knowledge that has not been included in any of the existing programs that I mentioned . 
however , I will certainly raise it with the minister . 
pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , I wish to welcome a page from the House of Commons who is participating in an exchange with the Senate . 
her name is Cynara Corbin . 
she is from Dollard - des - Ormeaux , Quebec , and she is studying criminology in the Faculty of Social Sciences at the University of Ottawa . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lewis , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
hon. Wilbert J . Keon : 
honourable senators , I wish to take this opportunity to provide a few brief remarks concerning Bill C - 6 . 
this bill is an extremely necessary piece of legislation , which I support with great enthusiasm and some concern . 
therefore , I feel it necessary to make a few brief remarks concerning the bill before it progresses to committee . 
our capacity to collect , store , merge , transfer and access information has accelerated greatly in recent years . 
the net result is that information of all kinds is flowing across the country and , indeed , around the globe more quickly and more freely today than ever before . 
while there are clearly a number of advantages arising from the expansion of our capabilities in this area , the issue of collecting , disclosing and accessing information also raises a number of concerns related to the privacy and confidentiality of the information being collected . 
honourable senators , it is clear that one of the main objectives of Bill C - 6 is to protect personal information held by the private sector and , in essence , to catch up with the pace of technology . 
the Privacy Act has protected personal information in the federal government ' s hands since 1982 . 
provinces have comparable legislation . 
however , the same is not true of information collected by the private sector . 
in this respect , the bill is long overdue . 
we must not move hastily without carefully considering the full implications presented by this bill . 
there is no area where privacy and confidentiality of information is of greater concern than that pertaining to personal health information . 
the public ' s perception and concerns regarding the collection and treatment of health information are well known but are worth noting here as a context to the concerns I wish to raise about the bill . 
first , patients believe that their health information will be kept confidential . 
second , patients believe that it is important to know and to control how their health information is shared by others , and do not want information released to third parties without their knowledge and consent . 
third , patients may be reluctant to confide information to health professionals as a result of concerns related to its use or disclosure . 
clause 2 ( 1 ) of the bill defines personal information as any information about an identifiable individual , other than the name , title or business address or telephone number of an employee of an organization . 
accordingly , information concerning the health or treatment of an identifiable patient , and information concerning the provision of health care by an identifiable individual health care provider are , by definition , to be considered personal information . 
honourable senators , the Canadian Medical Association , the Canadian Dental Association , and other health professional associations have voiced serious concerns about the negative impact that Bill C - 6 could have regarding the issue of personal information and other critical activities connected with the health system . 
as honourable senators know , the bill is designed to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed " in the course of commercial activities . " 
it was not developed with the health system in mind . 
indeed , I believe that , in the minds of many people , the health care system was excluded during the drafting of this bill . 
as a result , the degree to which the health system would be affected or impacted by the bill are unclear . 
although the bill focuses on commercial activity , it is clear that this activity cannot be distinguished from health care activity in a way that will ensure that health records are subject to different rules than those pertaining to other records . 
the broadly worded scope of Part 1 of the bill , and its application to health care providers who operate a business whose primary purpose is health care delivery , is of particular concern . 
how will the processing of data for the purposes of preventive medicine , medical diagnosis , medical research , the provision of care or treatment , and the management of health care services be impacted by the bill ? 
honourable senators , let me be specific . 
i believe it is imperative that Bill C - 6 be clarified to address four important issues . 
first , Bill C - 6 must include a clear definition of the information being accorded a right of privacy . 
as I have already noted , while the focus of the bill relates to the commercial realm , it does not distinctly clarify the extent to which health information would be impacted . 
for example , clause 4 ( 1 ) ( a ) asserts that the bill applies to every organization in respect of personal information that the organization collects , uses or discloses in the course of commercial activities . 
the issue of what constitutes commercial activity is not clearly defined . 
there seems to be an assumption that this automatically excludes health records . 
however , there is no clarity as to where a commercial activity ends and health care begins . 
in addition , there are no guidelines governing the movement of health information from the health care setting to the commercial setting . 
second , Bill C - 6 fails to protect health information . 
rules relating to health information must be developed in recognition of its special nature . 
in particular , the bill must be clarified and amended as required to incorporate specific rules relating to health information , rules that will place strong emphasis on the protection of privacy and that will ensure that the flow of health information is on a need - to - know basis and only under the control of the patient through informed consent . 
furthermore , any definition related to the collection and use of health information should include identifiable information , de - linked information , anonymous information and any composite form produced when information is linked to any information about a person or any other source . 
in addition , let me point out that a recent report released by the National Advisory Council on Health Info - structure clearly emphasized that any legislation respecting the privacy and protection of health information " should contain a clear prohibition against all secondary commercial use of personal health information . " 
third , not only should Bill C - 6 include specific provisions relating to health information , but also it is important that these provisions be applied equally to both the public and private sectors . 
it is my recommendation that these provisions be based on the framework provided by the Health Information Privacy Code developed and adopted by the Canadian Medical Association . 
this code could form the basis of legislation governing the collection , use and disclosure of health information . 
fourth , Part 2 of Bill C - 6 fails to provide the purposes for which electronic data relating to health care and medical records would be used . 
furthermore , there are currently no rules that exist , thereby leaving such activity open to abuse . 
honourable senators , I ask for your support in ensuring that these concerns be addressed before Bill C - 6 progresses any further . 
the government has an opportunity - indeed , an obligation - to provide Canadians with strong privacy rights with respect to health information . 
at the same time , there is a vital interest to protect the ability to transfer data for legitimate health care purposes and to promote better management and greater integration of our health care system . 
consequently , Bill C - 6 is an important and necessary piece of legislation . 
it is , however , essential that we ensure that it effectively answers the concerns voiced by members of the health care community . 
therefore , I believe we should try to be helpful to the government in committee by adopting changes to this bill , adjustments that would make it an even better bill than it is . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . ( L ' Acadie - Acadia ) , for the second reading of Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i do wish to point out to honourable senators a country covered by this treaty whose conduct raises questions regarding the propriety of Canada dealing with it . 
therefore , I hope that tomorrow , or whenever the bill is in front of our Banking Committee , there will be in attendance senior officials from Foreign Affairs who can best answer questions regarding all countries involved . 
the country I am referring to is Uzbekistan , which is one of the former Soviet republics in Central Asia . 
in a communiqu é dated as recently as October 20 , Human Rights Watch : 
... has independently documented a pattern of political arrest , detention and harassment of family members of political activists and religious dissidents during the past six months . 
there is also a wealth of credible evidence that police routinely plant small amounts of narcotics or ammunition on persons whom they arrest for their political or religious affiliation . 
the executive director of Human Rights Watch for Europe and Central Asia said : 
the Government of Uzbekistan professes to be preparing for free and fair elections but at the same time it is locking up the opposition ' s family members and throwing away the key . 
this is no way to achieve democracy . 
in another release the same day , Human Rights Watch said : 
schools and universities throughout Uzbekistan are closing their doors to Muslim men with beards and women in headscarves . 
it indicates that : 
the Government of Uzbekistan is assaulting religious freedom from all sides . 
the expulsion of Muslim students is yet another aspect of this campaign . 
if that were not enough , the Government of Canada , in its own briefing notes on the bill , says that : 
most foreign journalists have left the country under duress . 
total trade was $ 18 million in 1998 . 
there is no major Canadian investment in the country . 
no Canadian companies have production operations in petroleum and mining , which seems to be the main attractions there . 
those exploring the opportunities cite the Uzbek business environment as their principal reason for staying away . 
the same notes go on to say that Canadian high - tech companies that have made sales in Uzbekistan have experienced problems repatriating foreign currency from the area . 
it is not exactly one of the great potential areas for Canadian investors , by the experience to date . 
where there has been a repressive regime that has no intent of instituting a minimum of democracy , Canada has always taken a position , either through sanctions or some sort of boycotting . 
since there is so little , if any , Canadian involvement in Uzbekistan , I see no reason why we should go through with this treaty at this stage . 
i hope that these views can be challenged at the committee stage , or at least that they will be entertained , because unless I can be shown the necessity for having the treaty in place , for example , that without it the tax status of a number of Canadian citizens would be jeopardized , I think it would be appropriate to move an amendment to remove that treaty from the bill and put it aside for as long as needed . 
perhaps the regime there will understand that Canada is serious when it stands up for human rights and democracy and is not just parroting someone else ' s words . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Hervieux - Payette is not here today . 
this bill was moved by her . 
i am not sure if any other honourable senator wishes to speak on this matter ; if so , I would not wish to interfere with that desire . 
however , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I would move to refer the bill to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
may I ask a question ? 
we have had a number of these bills before . 
i recall that , as late as several months back , we had a similar bill , which was dealt with by the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
a number of issues , separate and apart from the issues raised by Senator Lynch - Staunton , were also raised at that time . 
why is this bill going to the Banking Committee instead of to the Foreign Affairs Committee , as seems to have been the case with previous tax treaty bills . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i think we are out of order here , honourable senators . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
honourable senators , before we get to that point , we should pass second reading . 
senator Hays : 
i think we should hear from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition . 
senator Kinsella : 
i will make it simple and move adjournment of the debate . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , in order to clarify the status of matters before the house , I , with leave , withdraw any motion I might have made in my remarks to move or refer the bill to committee . 
therefore , we can clear the way for Senator Kinsella ' s motion to adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
4 th day of resuming debate ) 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I have now had the pleasure - well , I must say , mostly pleasure - of listening to 11 Throne Speeches , either provincially or here in the Senate . 
whether they were here or in my home province of Manitoba , they have all had one similar characteristic . 
they have all been a bit vague . 
we must realize that this is the nature of a Speech from the Throne . 
they tend to be long on rhetoric and short on details . 
i have always had a certain compassion for the Governors General and the Lieutenant Governors who are put in the situation where they must read these particular speeches . 
in this Speech from the Throne , however , there were moments in which I personally was deeply touched because it set a new agenda - a children ' s agenda . 
it is very fitting that I speak to this today because this past Saturday , November 20 , as our colleague Senator Callbeck told us last Thursday , we celebrated National Child Day . 
as honourable senators know , in 1993 the Government of Canada designated November 20 as National Child Day to commemorate two historic United Nations events : the adoption of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child on November 20 , 1959 , and the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the Child on November 20 , 1989 . 
the youth of today are the leaders of tomorrow . 
to ensure that our children receive the best possible start in life , we require an investment in that future and in their future now . 
scientific evidence and research show us that a child ' s early development is crucial to their success as adults . 
as we move into the new millennium , we must ensure that our children are outfitted with the skills and advantages that they need to ensure a healthy and prosperous society . 
children need our love , support and encouragement , but they also need educational opportunities . 
they need the basic necessities of life . 
earlier this afternoon , I was reading a speech from Senator Gill on aboriginal people in this country . 
here is a group of children who , tragically , often do not have the basic necessities of life . 
in 1989 , an all - party resolution was passed by the House of Commons calling for the eradication of child poverty by the year 2000 . 
as Senator Cohen knows well , it is now November of 1999 and , sadly , we are actually further behind than we were in 1989 . 
however , with this Speech from the Throne and the upcoming budget , I hope legislators will begin to make good on that promise . 
obviously we will not succeed for the year 2000 , but hopefully we will begin the millennium right . 
poverty affects all aspects of a child ' s development , both short - term and long - term . 
it begins in the womb with a lack of appropriate prenatal nutrition , extends throughout the child ' s formative years , and affects all aspects of the child ' s growth and success . 
a child who is not getting even the basic necessities of life - food , shelter and adequate clothing - cannot be expected to learn and to prosper . 
increasingly , provincial welfare programs are encouraging recipients across this country to take on paid work . 
i am not opposed to people getting work if it is appropriate to them . 
i believe it is good for their own ego and personal development . 
however , if in forcing them into the workplace we have not provided for the adequate care of their children , then who have we benefited ? 
i know whom we have hurt . 
we have hurt children . 
these families just become more statistics , and we know them as the working poor instead of welfare recipients . 
we must ensure that the quality of care for these children is fundamental in our planning . 
nowhere in Canada are minimum wages high enough to allow even full - time workers to escape poverty . 
according to a recent report by the National Council of Welfare in the City of Winnipeg , in 1999 a single parent with one child would need to work 80 hours a week to simply get to the poverty line at a minimum wage job . 
in Winnipeg , a two - parent family with two children would need to work 118 hours a week to reach the poverty line . 
honourable senators , there are only 168 hours in a week . 
the Child Tax Credit , which was a marvellous plan introduced by this government , was unfortunately interpreted by some provinces as a system that allowed them to deduct from welfare payments . 
while it benefited the working poor , it did not enhance the income of those living on welfare . 
children need their parents in all of their years . 
some of us even wonder if our adult children do not continue needing us , but they particularly need us in their formative years . 
that is why programs such as Aboriginal Head Start , the Canadian Prenatal Nutrition Program and the Community Action Program for Children have all been essential in laying the groundwork for the long - term , healthy development of children . 
that is why I was very pleased to see the seven undertakings in the Speech from the Throne concerning children : increased maternity and parental leave benefits ; a federal - provincial agreement on more support for early childhood development ; more after - tax money in the hands of families ; more family friendly workplaces , especially in the federal government ; modernization of family law ; a third significant investment in the National Child Benefit ; and strengthened learning opportunities through an expanded SchoolNet . 
this is not in my speech , honourable senators , but if I was helping Paul Martin draft the budget , I would put all of the tax cuts in the hands of poor working families . 
all of these , honourable senators , are very positive initiatives . 
in particular , the Speech from the Throne announced improved parental leave for parents , through extending and making more accessible Employment Insurance benefits for parental leave . 
indeed , in the future , we might want to study changing EI for that purpose as well . 
for the moment , however , let us concentrate on the extended parental leave for parents . 
although the initiative is a very positive one , I hope that , when the government examines this program , they understand that today ' s parents are willing to share that responsibility . 
it is not only the mothers who will access this leave . 
this is a marvellous opportunity for fathers to access this leave as well . 
however , under current EI legislation , if a mother and a father were both to share parental leave , each would serve a two - week waiting period . 
that is unfortunate , because I for one would like to see more fathers in this country taking control of the home situation , even for short periods of time . 
on a personal note , I know that when I spent six weeks in hospital at the time of the birth of my second child , my older child , who was not able to visit , and her dad became extremely close because he became her principal caregiver . 
i must say that one of the notes of interest - and I think it was something that made her dad her favourite rather than her mother - was that , when the cart came around every afternoon I would buy my older daughter a chocolate bar , I would write her a story letter , all done in pictures because she was only three , and I would send those things home with her dad . 
i did not know for some time after I returned home that they were , in fact , eating the chocolate bar together before breakfast , on our bed . 
never mind that special moment in the lives of my husband and our first child was one in which bonding took place , and that bonding is still extremely tight . 
early childhood development is critical to ensure good outcomes for children , both in the long term and in the short term . 
children who have good early childhood experiences have better school grades , better self - esteem and better social skills . 
later in life , they have better employment , fewer social problems and fewer health problems . 
they are less likely to be teen parents , will use fewer drugs and are less likely to be involved in crime . 
does that really surprise us ? 
let us take a typical five - year - old girl or boy who is entering kindergarten . 
this may be their first or second experience at school . 
in terms of children from a middle - class family or even a poorer family with excellent parenting skills - yes , they do exist out there - those children will go off to kindergarten knowing their name , knowing where they live , knowing their telephone number , knowing their letters , knowing their colours , knowing their numbers . 
those children are right at a pivotal moment where learning can take place , and the most critical learning at that age is learning to read . 
compare that with children who do not know their numbers , do not know their letters , and do not know their colours . 
immediately , from the very moment when schooling begins , one group of children is at a disadvantage compared to the other group of children . 
that is why early childhood intervention is so critical if we want to turn around the opportunities for these children . 
one study that I recently read indicated that 28 per cent of boys with antisocial behaviour entering kindergarten were delinquent by the age of 13 - 28 per cent of them ! 
that is why a national children ' s agenda is so very important . 
the government ' s promise to work with provinces and territories to put in place an action plan by December 2000 to further strengthen the community support for early childhood development is essential . 
the national children ' s agenda - a federal , provincial and territorial initiative - shares many of the objectives of National Child Day . 
they both share a common message . 
Canadians working together can ensure that all children thrive in an atmosphere of love , care and understanding , valued as individuals in childhood and given the opportunity to reach their full potential as adults . 
the Speech from the Throne also announced Exchanges Canada , a program designed to give 100,000 young people each year the chance to live and learn in other parts of Canada . 
what a wonderful experience ! 
i am a richer Canadian for having lived in a number of provinces in this country , and I know my children are richer for having lived in a number of provinces and for being able to speak both of Canada ' s official languages . 
let us also not forget programs like Katimavik . 
honourable senators , over the next 10 days , a group of those young people will be visiting us here on the Hill , and I suggest that you go and speak to some of them . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt the honourable senator but her time has expired . 
senator Carstairs : 
may I have leave to continue , honourable senators ? 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Carstairs : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
those children who tend to go to Katimavik are not the highly motivated , university - bound youngsters . 
they are the youngsters who do not know what they want to do . 
however , I can tell you that my experience in meeting with them over the years has taught me that , after they have completed a year at Katimavik , they are highly motivated young people who have learned both of our official languages , who have worked in community - service projects in this country , and who now have a plan for their future . 
that is what we need to encourage in this country . 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne also renewed the government ' s commitment to reintroducing young offenders legislation . 
in fact , the Minister of Justice has already reintroduced that proposed legislation as Bill C - 3 . 
i will be examining this bill very carefully to ensure that we are not being too punitive . 
let me quote from a June 20 , 1995 report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs concerning Bill C - 37 , amendments to the Young Offenders Act , Part I : 
several witnesses maintained that legitimate public concerns about youth violence must be met with accurate information about actual crime rates and about the operation of the youth justice system . 
your Committee believes that common misperceptions concerning the incidence of violent youth crime , in particular , as well as the range of legal consequences , serve neither young persons nor the public at large . 
those misperceptions may foster unfounded fears and demands for increasingly punitive measures that may do little to address the actual causes of violent youth crime . 
we hear constantly that youth crime is on the rise - particularly we hear this from members of the Reform Party - that youth are becoming more violent , and that stronger measures are needed because the current young offenders legislation is too weak . 
however , honourable senators , a recent publication by the Correctional Service of Canada , which examined data from the Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics on young offenders , found that , overall , youth charged with a criminal offence and youth processed through the youth court system for criminal offences had decreased from 1992 to 1997 . 
when violent crimes committed by youth are examined nationally , only a slight increase is evident . 
youth transfers to adult court have neither increased nor decreased . 
finally , the seriousness of youth dispositions has increased , contrary to the public perception that they are receiving sentences which are too lenient . 
one study I read recently indicated that the average sentence imposed on a young person for a crime was higher than that imposed on an adult for the same crime . 
we hear a significant amount about gangs , but in Manitoba , three - quarters of the members of gangs are not young people at all - they are adults . 
honourable senators , Canada jails children at twice the rate of most states in the United States , which has the highest incarceration rate of adults as well as young people in the entire Western world . 
in Finland , there are only 10 boys under the age of 18 in jail , out of a population of 5 million . 
in Canada , there are 4,000 youths in custody out of a population of 31 million . 
do we honestly believe that our young people are six and one - half times worse than children in Finland ? 
in Norway , they have done away with children ' s jails altogether . 
honourable senators , 30 per cent to 70 per cent of young offenders suffer from a learning disability of some sort . 
rather than toughening young offender legislation , we should be putting resources toward the problems of the learning disabled while they are young . 
research shows that children who benefit from high - quality early childhood care and education are far less likely to grow up to be involved in crime and violence either as victims or perpetrators . 
the National Crime Prevention Council recommended fighting crimes by beginning with good social programs for children . 
honourable senators , at the beginning of my remarks I referred to Saturday having been the 10 th anniversary of the adoption of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child . 
the convention addresses the rights of children and youth under the age of 18 . 
it also recognizes the important role of the family in raising children . 
prior to the 1989 convention , a child under international law was considered an object to be given care and protection . 
the convention altered this perception by recognizing children as individual persons , with rights to freedom of expression , association , assembly , religion and privacy . 
canada has come under international criticism since 1989 for failing to repeal section 43 of the Criminal Code , which is in conflict with section 19 of the United Nations convention . 
in 1995 , the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended that corporal punishment in the home and elsewhere be prohibited and requested that Canada reconsider section 43 in light of this recommendation . 
i am disappointed that there is no mention of the repeal of section 43 in the Speech from the Throne . 
in the media yesterday there were reports that the Minister of Justice will be introducing changes to the Criminal Code this week to increase the protection of animals from violence and abuse . 
the changes will be made in order to recognize in law that animals are not property , but recognized in their own right . 
children are unique individuals . 
they need our love , our support and most of all our guidance . 
children need discipline , but there are many other ways to discipline a child without using corporal punishment . 
indeed , studies have shown that corporal punishment leads to more violence rather than less . 
they are moving in the right direction . 
anything that protects our children and encourages their full growth and potential is a positive initiative . 
as a good teacher , I will be keeping my report card on this matter . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
i heard what the government claims it will do to help improve the lives of aboriginal , female and disabled Canadians , but hard as I listened , I could hear no mention of the fourth group - visible minority Canadians . 
it was as if we had disappeared from the face of the earth , or at least the face of the earth as the present government envisages it . 
somehow , I was not surprised . 
visible minorities really have never been a priority for this government . 
we are not part of what the Prime Minister grandly calls the Liberal vision of the new millennium . 
i suspect the reason for this is that , unlike women , we do not attract attention by the sheer force of our numbers , nor do we incite feelings of guilt , as do the disabled . 
we are not the focus of great media interest , as are aboriginals . 
instead , we appear to be simply just there : 
blacks , Chinese , Vietnamese , East Indians , Pakistanis , Nigerians , Senegalese , Egyptians , Lebanese , Nicaraguans , Bolivians , et cetera . 
we are a heterogeneous collection of individuals from every part of the globe . 
we are a group of people containing many who are struggling to adapt to the new homeland and many others who have been here for a century or more , all minorities in their own land , each trying to come to grips with the various forms of racism , bigotry and intolerance they face in their daily lives . 
none , it would seem , is worthy of any special attention , any suggestion of interest or any hint of consideration on the part of this government . 
in the face of such inexplicable and inexcusable indifference , it behooves me today to rise in this chamber . 
it has left a small but vital part of our community unrepresented and without a voice . 
therefore , I rise to bring , for a brief moment , the case of visible minorities before this honourable chamber . 
honourable senators , I wish to remind the government that visible minorities are also citizens of this wonderful country . 
despite their different skin colour , eye shape , accent or customs , they are all part of our great Canadian family . 
they should not be overlooked or taken for granted , as they so obviously were in the Speech from the Throne . 
according to the latest census , 32 per cent of Torontonians are visible minorities , as are 31 per cent of the people of Vancouver , 15 per cent of Calgary , 12 per cent of Montreal and 7 per cent of Halifax . 
in the next few years , these numbers are set to rise to even greater levels . 
statistics Canada forecasts that there will be some 7 million visible minorities in Canada by the year 2016 . 
if this happens , they will then represent 20 per cent of our Canadian population . 
despite their ever - growing numbers , visible minorities remain largely shut out of the mainstream society . 
honourable senators , look around you . 
visible minorities make up 11 per cent of our population . 
do they make up 11 per cent of the Senate of Canada or the House of Commons ? 
what about the Armed Forces , the judiciary or the banking industry ? 
how many visible minority university presidents do you know ? 
why is it that the CBC cannot seem to find any visible minorities to sit on its many discussion panels and pundit shows ? 
why , indeed . 
the exclusion of visible minorities from their just portion of the employment pie is a phenomenon that affects every sector of our society . 
the Public Service of Canada is a prime example . 
at National Defence , there are less than 500 visible minorities in a population of 17,000 civilian employees ; and there are barely 300 among 12,000 at Corrections Canada . 
the situation is even more disgraceful the higher up the ladder you go . 
honourable senators , less than 3 per cent of senior level managers in the Public Service of Canada are visible minorities . 
i am told that , GIC appointments apart , there is not one visible minority deputy minister anywhere in the entire public service . 
in fact , the last non - GIC visible minority deputy minister apparently retired some two decades ago . 
think about that . 
there must be over 100 deputy ministers in the public service , and they are all white ! 
in other words , not one of the more than 9,000 visible minorities I mentioned a moment ago has the requisite qualifications to be a DM . 
not a single one of them has the education , the experience or the know - how to do the job . 
that is hard to believe . 
however , it is not a question of time ; it is a question of attitude . 
either the people running the Public Service of Canada believe in employment equity or they do not . 
quite frankly , given their record to date , I do not think they do . 
honourable senators , the public service is not alone in its failure to open its ranks to visible minorities . 
the same situation prevails in our own backyard . 
take a minute to think about the last time you saw a senior visible minority Senate employee . 
if you are like me , that minute might stretch out to be two or three . 
the fact of the matter is , according to the clerk ' s office , only 1.2 per cent of Senate employees are visible minorities . 
that works out to a total of 6 of 490 people , in an institution that is supposed to be helping to set the example for others to follow . 
i mention these two institutions as examples but there are many others . 
the real problem , as I see it , is that by failing to act they are reinforcing the idea that there is no need to act . 
in other words , if we do nothing then maybe the problem will go away . 
honourable senators , we have seen previously , with the Quebec referendum , and today , with the East Coast fishery , that such an approach leads only to trouble . 
visible minorities are being denied equitable employment opportunities . 
we should be talking about it , seeking input , and looking for ways to overcome the problem . 
pretending that it does not exist solves nothing , yet that is exactly what we are doing . 
the same thing is happening in the area of race relations . 
Canadians like to maintain the fiction that they live in a kinder , gentler nation . 
we have no race riots here . 
Assassins do not gun down minority community leaders . 
blacks are not beaten half to death by gangs of policemen on the side of a highway or sexually attacked in the bathrooms of police stations . 
everyone gets along and there is space for all . 
the only problem with that is that it is not true . 
canada is not some sort of modern - day Arcadia ; nor does every Canadian love their neighbour . 
in fact , very often instead of love there is animosity , distrust , fear and hatred - yes , hatred . 
hate crimes happen in this country , although , thankfully , not on the scale of our neighbours to the south . 
she was kicked , beaten , and drowned . 
why ? 
because she was a visible minority . 
there are hate groups here , as well : the Ku Klux Klan , White Power Canada , the Nationalist Party of Canada , and the Heritage Front . 
newspapers and television largely ignore the issue . 
why ? 
because the majority of Canadians are not interested . 
for white people , employment equity , racism , and hate crimes are intellectual rather than practical questions . 
and understandably so : 
honourable senators , visible minorities are not seeking a free ride . 
they are not asking for things others are denied . 
all visible minorities want is to work hard at rewarding jobs , to raise their families in safe environments , and to provide their children with the opportunity of enjoying a healthy and prosperous life , just like everyone else . 
just like everyone else , they want to be accepted for who they are and for the people they are , not for the country of their origin or their skin colour . 
surely we have progressed far enough over the last few decades to make this possible . 
then again , perhaps I am being too optimistic . 
honourable senators , I gave a speech earlier this year on the state of black community in Canada . 
in my remarks , I said that I very much doubted if I would see real equality in my lifetime . 
afterward , someone came up to me and asked why I chose to continue speaking out if , in my heart , I did not believe the situation would change . 
i replied that it was not really a question of choice . 
it is a duty that I accept , and willingly so , despite whatever personal reservations I might have . 
honourable senators , I do have reservations . 
i wonder . 
when I look around me today , I see that the negative stereotyping of visible minorities in society and in the mass media still exist . 
the glass employment ceiling is still here . 
visible minorities are still treated as niggers , chinks , pakis , and gooks . 
so , no , I do not think much has changed . 
the answer to these questions does not lie in legislation - that much is obvious . 
we have the Charter of Rights and Freedoms , the Canadian Human Rights Act , and the Canadian Citizenship Act . 
we have all of this legislation and more , yet prejudice and racism persist . 
members of the Reform Party suggest publicly that visible minorities should be kept in the back of the store , out of sight . 
the Public Service of Canada grossly under - employs visible minorities and argues that such a long - term project cannot be rushed . 
members of hate groups routinely publish material designed to incite racial and ethnic intolerance and violence - and I could go on . 
honourable senators , the real answer to racism and prejudice lies in education and discussion . 
people have to learn about one another . 
they have to overcome their fears of one another . 
to do this , they need information . 
information is the key to breaking down suspicion and destroying stereotypes . 
it brings community together ; it promotes better understanding . 
however , information on its own will not solve everything . 
there must be commitment . 
there must be a shared belief that visible minorities have a right to the full fruits of citizenship . 
here , we come to the crux of the issue . 
i believe it is part of the federal government ' s responsibility to foster this commitment . 
it is part of its job to lead us , as a nation , towards harmony and mutual respect . 
it sets the example for others to follow . 
however , this is not happening . 
the Prime Minister and his cabinet have decided to ignore the issue of visible minorities . 
they are pretending that it does not exist . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am sorry to interrupt but the honourable senator ' s time has expired . 
is leave granted for him to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Oliver : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
their problems are not worthy of attention . 
finding the keys to stopping racism , inequality and discrimination are not national priorities . 
obviously I cannot and do not agree with this ; thus my decision to rise today in this chamber . 
in closing , honourable senators , let me suggest that if the government has no interest in addressing this subject , we certainly could do so here . 
given the range and depth of experience and expertise in this chamber , I am sure a debate on the place of visible minorities in Canada would produce some very valuable testimony . 
if we wish to proceed further , a subcommittee of the Social Affairs Committee could be set up . 
its mandate might include a cross - country tour to gather and synthesize the most up - to - date opinions on visible - minority employment . 
another possibility would be to establish a joint Senate - Commons committee to follow up on the conclusions of the 1984 Daudlin committee . 
that committee , you will recall , studied the participation of visible minorities in Canadian society . 
whichever route we take , honourable senators , we must not follow this government ' s example by saying nothing . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I compliment the mover and the seconder of the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne , who both spoke eloquently for their provinces and regions . 
research funding and the method of that funding can impact the lifeblood of a country , determining the future of its economy , its health system and the well - being of its citizens . 
while I applaud the Throne Speech initiative , I do want to comment briefly on what the Throne Speech did not mention . 
that is what Nobel Laureate John Polyani calls " the commercialization of science . " 
in a recent address to the Royal Society , he attacked this trend as one which is ruining Canada ' s universities and driving the best young scientists out of the country . 
he might have added that it is also contributing to the demise of a civil service which once focused on consumer and public interest more intensely than on corporate concerns . 
the Nobel Prize winner attacked the research funding policies of federal and provincial governments that have turned universities into " outlying branches of industry . " 
canada has gone too far , he said , in shifting to industrialized research and away from systemic or basic research . 
the flight of top - notch scientists and researchers to the U.S. is also a result , at least in part , of these misguided policies because , strangely enough , the U.S. has kept this industrialization of research at bay . 
in the U.S. , only 6 per cent of university research is funded by industry . 
i hope the initiative in the Throne Speech regarding the Institutes for Health Research will lead to a change of values in this matter . 
farmers have produced near record crops this year . 
in Saskatchewan alone , they have grown 27.8 million tonnes of grain , oilseeds and specialty crops . 
still , their livelihood and way of life are on the line , in part if not entirely , because the government subsidies have been reduced to a fraction of what governments in Europe and the U.S. give to their grain producers . 
canada does not subsidize those agricultural producers . 
if the silence of the Throne Speech was cruel , the government ' s response to the crisis in subsequent weeks was like the " silence of the lambs . " 
the Premiers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan were summarily dismissed when they came to Ottawa . 
the federal Minister of Agriculture then announced a $ 170 million top - up to the Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance program , commonly referred to as AIDA . 
that is less than 15 per cent of what the premiers of Manitoba and Saskatchewan said was needed . 
the Manitoba government spent $ 79 million this spring helping flood - stricken farmers . 
now it says it cannot pay its portion of the top - up . 
the Saskatchewan government also finds the arrangement impossible and is thinking of pulling out of AIDA altogether . 
even if the provinces were able to come up with a great deal more money , AIDA is a demonstratively flawed program . 
as of October 25 , this program had disbursed only $ 227 million , less than 13 per cent of what the minister describes as a $ 1.78 billion aid package . 
as mentioned here before , more than half the applicants in Manitoba and Saskatchewan were rejected . 
to quote Morris Dorasch in Agri - Week : 
to the extent it pays it all , AIDA pays the wrong people for the wrong reasons in the wrong way . 
i would like to reiterate one point that was made during the emergency debate . 
the people on the land need cash in their hands before Christmas . 
if they do not have it , they will not be putting seed in the ground this spring . 
that is the simple truth of it . 
there is no shortage of ideas on how to deliver the money - through NISA , through taxes or through legislatively reducing freight rates charged to farmers , which studies have shown are too high by at least $ 5 per tonne . 
there is no shortage of money , the Finance Minister has told us . 
the real shortage then is one of political will . 
that is why Western organizations are attempting to persuade the Prime Minister to see for himself that the crisis is real and to visit the Western farm communities . 
he is entitled to as much protection from the Canadian government as other producers get in other countries with whom he has to be in competition . 
today , our wheat growers get less than one - third of subsidies that go to the competitors in Europe . 
the Leader of the Government in this chamber chastised the provinces for their failure to provide further funds for AIDA . 
it must be pointed out that , both in the U.S. and the European Union , it is the senior level of government that finances subsidies . 
no American state provides any farm subsidy program worth mentioning . 
the European Union ' s super budget is the one that covers farm subsidies . 
thousands of farm families are being forced off the land and we are being told it is the inevitable consequence of technological progress , but industrialization in this sector is neither inevitable nor progress . 
perhaps it is time for farmers to put out their own tough message . 
buying inputs that increase outputs in Canada ' s foreign exchange earnings through exports , but not the farmer ' s bottom line , is bad business that places no value on farmers ' initiatives and labour . 
the issue of the family farm is summarized in a New York Times article which I received from my fearless leader just recently . 
i want to read from it : 
until recently , most people in the world were fed by small farmers , producing diverse staple food crops to serve local communities and local markets . 
but under WTO rules small farmers are disappearing . 
in much of the world ( including the U.S. ) global corporations have taken over most aspects of farming , using chemical - intensive methods , and now biotechnology . 
small farmers have given way to miles of single crop luxury monocultures , for export to foreign markets . 
and every mile the food travels causes environmental havoc . 
the increase in ocean , road , and air transport to ship food back and forth across the planet massively increases energy use , ocean and air pollution , and climate change .... And 
it requires far more packaging , putting added pressure on forests . 
it also requires new infrastructure ... Anyway , 
industrial food is less healthy ; heavy with chemicals that pollute soil and water and cause public health problems . 
therefore , if we do not protect the family farm , we are losing a valuable resource . 
and the family farm , of course , is no longer small . 
in Canada , it could be 10,000 or 20,000 hectares . 
the subject of the national children ' s agenda , the poverty of children , and the value of early childhood education has been covered most eloquently by Senator Carstairs . 
i simply want to say to her that , if she wishes to bring forward once more an amendment to the Criminal Code on corporal punishment , I would be delighted to support such an amendment . 
when I was on the school board in Manitoba , we certainly got rid of corporal punishment in the bylaws . 
i wish to talk about some other parts of the children ' s agenda that I am not sure will be quickly carried out . 
for example , in June 1997 , and later in the election campaign , it was said that a new Liberal government would establish centres of excellence for children ' s well - being and that $ 20 million in funding would be provided over five years . 
some 30 months later , not one centre has been established . 
even more important is the matter of child care . 
i would like to touch on two recent reports , to remind us why we should not be neglecting child care and why we need to put a national system in place . 
first among them is powerful new evidence , as Senator Carstairs has stated , from neuroscience suggesting that a child ' s first three years affects learning , behaviour and health throughout life . 
failing to give children a good start is the real brain drain . 
second , the report makes the case that public investments in programs for these years are as important as investments in education , post - secondary education and health care . 
third , the report states that communities are very effective at integrating provincial and federal programs at the community level . 
this report , like many before it , reminds political leaders that we ignore child care at our social peril . 
it is calling for the federal government to invest $ 3.5 billion towards a national system of quality , affordable child care , in partnership with parents and provincial and territorial governments . 
what would be the return on this investment ? 
the report states : 
many social programs support families , but child care is the backbone of them all . 
child care is the one program that embraces both income security and services . 
child care has been shown over and over again to be the essential ingredient for the work force participation of parents , especially mothers . 
improving the work force participation of mothers is essential to reducing child poverty . 
Michael McCracken of Infometrica has gone further and quantified exactly how many jobs might be created . 
a $ 1 billion cut in personal income taxes would generate an estimated 9,000 jobs , at a cost of $ 96,000 per job . 
one billion dollars spent on child care would create 46,000 jobs , at a cost of only $ 8,300 per job . 
that is a sad commentary because child care workers are not paid enough . 
however , those are the brutal facts . 
columnist Linda McQuaig tells us that Health Canada has developed a blueprint of a national child care program . 
however , child care is not a program , it seems , that is being vigorously or at all promoted by the Government of Canada . 
the Throne Speech also does not place any emphasis on protecting the health of children from environmental threats . 
allow me to cite an example . 
we know that municipal waste incinerators , some of our industries , and people who burn treated wood are putting dioxins into the environment . 
we know that trace amounts of this very toxic chemical are in our food supply . 
worse , they are in mother ' s breast milk at levels 40 times the concentration found in one rib steak . 
a sterling opportunity , of course , was presented during the debate on Bill C - 32 to ensure that dioxins would be phased out and to persuade municipalities , provincial governments , and industries to change industrial processes . 
the government also squandered an opportunity to show real leadership in negotiating the global treaty for the ban that is needed if Canadians are to be protected from long - range atmospheric transport of dioxin and other persistent chemicals . 
however , it is not too late - we can still go ahead . 
the Throne Speech suggests that action will be taken on pesticides . 
action is long overdue , as there are now some 6,000 formulated products registered in Canada . 
yet , as the Auditor General has pointed out , no data is collected on the use of pesticides ; nor do we know all the ingredients in these products , since only active ingredients are required to be formally registered , while toxic oils or solvents used as formulants are trade secrets . 
the effect of pesticide exposure on children is not measured . 
only the effect on adult males is considered . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
i am sorry to interrupt the honourable senator , but her speaking time has expired . 
senator Spivak : 
might I have leave to finish my remarks , honourable senators ? 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Spivak : 
these are just some of the deficiencies in the 1969 Pest Control Products Act , which is badly out of date . 
five years ago , the " purple book " was released , proposing a new regulatory system , recognizing the inherent conflict of interest of Agriculture Canada as both the promoter and regulator of pest control products . 
regulatory authority was transferred to the Minister of Health . 
five years later , no legislation has been introduced . 
to paraphrase T . S . Eliot , can we expect that between thought and action no shadow will fall ? 
ironically , while the government has recognized the conflict of interest in pesticides , it is turning a blind eye to conflict of interest in other matters of food safety and the environment . 
the Canadian Food Inspection Agency , for example , a promoter of biotechnology , was placed in a conflict when , through Bill C - 32 , it was given responsibility for the environmental assessment of bioengineered plants and animals . 
environment Canada ' s logical role was eliminated . 
the next issue I would like to address briefly is climate change . 
the Throne Speech tells us that the government will work with other governments to keep its Kyoto commitment . 
the Kyoto commitment , for those who need reminding , was a way for countries , Canada among them , to save face about not meeting their Rio commitments . 
almost a decade has passed since countries agreed to reduce greenhouse gases , and Canada , among other countries , still has no plan . 
what I want to say is very simple . 
globally , damage caused by natural disasters is doubling every five to ten years . 
in 1960 , it was less than $ 10 billion per year . 
now , it is more than $ 70 billion . 
last year , Canada ' s insurance industry paid out $ 1.5 billion . 
hon. Normand Grimard : 
i practiced law in Abitibi . 
i even had the great misfortune to run against Gilles , R é al ' s son , as he was called , in a federal election . 
there are only 38 days remaining before many people break open the bubbly at midnight on December 31 to toast the passage into another century and another millennium . 
however , the expensive U.S. imported fruit on the platter will be a reminder to many that they can no longer travel outside the country as often as they used to . 
the value of the Canadian dollar has dropped by one third since the 1970 s , and a good part of that fall occurred in the last three years . 
ordinary employees are paid in Canadian dollars . 
their employers , who export more to the United States , travel . 
while the rich make money , average Canadians tighten their belts , because they earn fifty cents for every dollar earned by Americans , and must pay $ 1.50 for everything they import from the United States . 
i know that I am going to be told : " You come from Abitibi . 
for one thing , there is no question of artificially flooding the economy with currency . 
and for another , I note that the Speech from the Throne offers nothing for those worried about the health of our dollar . 
the government seems barely perturbed . 
last year , all the Prime Minister had to say was that it was not a problem if Canadian tourists could not travel to the United States , because they would go to New Brunswick instead . 
i am all in favour of Canadian tourists visiting their own country first . 
i recognize that a well - run economy begins at home , but I must say that neither do I like the sort of resignation that says that if Canadians can make it to New Brunswick or , for that matter , anywhere else in Canada , they have nothing to complain about . 
as for inspiration and enthusiasm in the Speech from the Throne , the simple answer is that it was measured out in very small doses . 
in order to create jobs , the government would have to reduce taxes . 
however , whenever the Prime Minister and his ministers are asked about this , they always find a reason to put off any such measure . 
on the contrary , Canada tolerates a high level of unemployment compared to the United States , a heavy tax burden , a shortage of cash and a lack of jobs for young people . 
worst of all , our brightest people are moving to the United States for two reasons : better salaries , because they are paid in U.S. dollars , and less taxes . 
also , a large number of bright people from abroad refuse to work in Canada for the same reasons . 
Peter C . Newman , a pundit writer and a learned commentator , has been writing for decades on the Canadian economy . 
in an article in the business section of The Ottawa Citizen of November 17 , 1999 , Mr. Newman said that Nortel Networks President John Roth was correct recently in his assessment that Canadian personal tax rates are sending the country ' s best and brightest academic brains to the United States . 
Mr. Newman stated that in the latest issue of the University of Western Ontario ' s Ivey Business Journal , John Roth compared the loss to that of " the Gretzkys of high - tech . " 
moreover , according to Mr. Roth , only 28 out of the 400 senior executives of Nortel reside in Canada . 
honourable senators , yesterday , you probably received , like me , a release from the National Press Club , announcing that the person to whom I just referred , John Roth , Nortel Networks President , will deliver a speech on Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , in Ottawa . 
the topic is : " Why is Canada losing not only its greatest talents and its best paid people , but also its industry leaders ? " 
in a way , the government is spreading a half - truth . 
we sell 85 per cent of our exports to the United States and our weak dollar is an asset in that respect . 
the flip side of the coin is that the government omits and refuses to mention that we also buy 75 per cent of our imports from the United States and that we must pay almost $ 1.50 Canadian for each U.S. dollar . 
these cyclical lows in the value of our dollar cost us huge amounts of money . 
in the first six months of 1999 , we imported $ 25.8 billion worth of vehicles , parts and rolling stock , as well as $ 22 billion worth of boilers and mechanical equipment for heavy industry . 
another essential component of our imports is electronic and recording equipment , $ 11.7 billion worth having been imported from the United States in six months . 
according to another study , the price of American magazines sold in Canada rose 17 per cent over the past year . 
when we sell our raw materials to the United States , moreover , our bulk iron and aluminum , we very often buy them back once they have been transformed into finished products , so we are penalized twice if our dollar is low . 
as for the food in our shopping baskets , the price of fruit and vegetables , mostly imported from the United States , has gone up 30 per cent since 1992 , and the price of cereals close to 25 per cent . 
we glorify our status as the United States ' neighbour in describing our lifestyle , which is similar to theirs , while also using it to distinguish ourselves from them , reaffirming our own identity to all and sundry . 
retail business , airlines , sports - and we have certainly heard enough about the problems of major league hockey in Canada - scientific research , the arts , television , culture and publishing , all are areas in which it has been proven that we have trouble resisting the United States ' drawing power . 
the government has up to now said that the weak exchange rate of the Canadian dollar encourages exports . 
the dollar ' s weakness creates one of the most harmful elements of instability . 
it seems important to point out from another perspective that the Americans are not only visiting our country but are in the process of buying it up , in cash , in bits and blocks , although it is not for sale . 
they are gaining control of our businesses , because the price is ridiculously low due to the poor health of the Canadian dollar , pardon me , weaker even than the Caouette buck . 
in an article in La Presse on October 16 , Mr. Mundell is said to have stated that the Canadian dollar ' s loss over 25 years of a third of its value is equivalent to a national cut in salary . 
the renowned economist described such a devaluation as stupidity . 
he went on to propose that Canada abandon its floating money policy and adopt a fixed rate of exchange with the U.S. dollar . 
Richard Harris , a Professor of Economics at Simon Fraser University in B.C. , supports this fixed rate and is one of a clear minority that sees this as nothing but beneficial . 
such blockage does not create unanimity . 
not being an economist , I do not want to recommend anything . 
however , I know that the dollar ' s ups and the downs creates instantaneous gain . 
how many of our citizens with less of a flair for predicting the humours of the economic weather are also becoming poorer ? 
i cannot think of the former without feeling sympathy for the latter . 
the loonie ' s sudden and pronounced fluctuations have a negative psychological effect . 
in fact , need I point to the fact that 85 per cent of our exports go to the United States , but that 75 per cent of our imports come from there as well . 
no one should say that , so long as Canada exports , all is for the best in the best of worlds . 
i have another point . 
i can think of Imasco which , just a few days ago , sold Pharmaprix in Quebec and Shoppers Drug Mart elsewhere in Canada . 
Canadian ownership titles are fast disappearing . 
i bet it will be in Canada . 
think about GM ' s assembly plant in Boisbriand , which has been kept on life support for 10 years and where employees are constantly talking about their fear that the plant will soon close . 
canada is enjoying enviable prosperity , but it is playing a dangerous game . 
i am sounding the alarm because our collective purchasing power has diminished in the past few years , because we have lost jobs , because our young people are worried about their future , and because we are reading messages of concern in the media . 
and on an even bolder note , I know that some people are suggesting that Canada follow the lead of the European Union and adopt a common currency , which would be the U.S. dollar . 
honestly , we have not yet reached that point . 
i think that the vast majority of Canadians , whichever of the two official languages we speak , have invested too much of what we are as a nation to turn our backs on our identity . 
it is for this reason that we refuse to become Americans . 
only through such action will Canada be able to hang on to its reputation . 
honourable senators , I am sure that this is the wish of all members in this place . 
all of us wish to pass on to our children a country in full prosperity . 
our economy will only improve through firm and decisive action . 
now that the government seems to have beaten inflation and , for two years now , has brought in balanced budgets , it is unacceptable that the Canadian dollar should stand at 66 cents U.S. Persisting in this policy can only lay us open to questions . 
committee Authorized to Apply Papers and Evidence Gathered on Examination of Previous Bill to Study of Current Bill 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Oliver , seconded by the Honourable Senator Di Nino : 
that the papers and evidence received and taken by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during its study of Bill S - 17 , to amend the Criminal Code respecting criminal harassment and other related matters , in the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee , when and if it is formed , for its present study of Bill S - 6 . - ( 
honourable Senator Cools ) 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , Senator Cools has yielded the floor , and I wish to speak . 
in closing the debate on this motion , I should like to refer you to - 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I hesitate to interrupt Senator Oliver , but this has been adjourned in the name of Senator Cools . 
if Senator Oliver closes debate , she will not be given the opportunity to speak . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Oliver : 
senator Carstairs : 
that is fine , honourable senators , so long as Senator Cools does not wish to speak . 
i certainly do not want to speak and am quite prepared to listen to Senator Oliver . 
senator Hays : 
since Senator Cools has cleared this matter with Senator Oliver , he can proceed . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , in closing the debate on this motion , I should like to refer you to paragraphs 874 and 875 on page 241 of Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms , 6 th Edition . 
they provide as follows : 
when committees have not completed their enquiries before the end of the session , they may report this fact to the House together with any evidence which may have been taken . 
in their report , they may recommend that the same subject matter , with the evidence taken in that session , be referred again in the new session . 
a committee cannot report the evidence taken before a similar committee in a previous session , except as an appendix , unless it has received authority from the House to consider that evidence . 
clearly , evidence already taken before a committee in a previous session may be referred back to a committee in a new session with the authority of the Senate . 
citation 875 specifically indicates that this is acceptable . 
it provides that only where the authority of the Senate is not given , the committee cannot report this evidence except in an appendix . 
obtaining the authorization of the Senate for the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs to consider the evidence taken on Bill S - 17 in the last session in its study in the current section of Bill S - 6 would mean the committee could make full use of evidence already gathered . 
the British practice also supports the acceptability of my motion . 
the 22 nd edition of Erskine May , on page 635 and 669 , provides that reports or minutes of evidence of previous committees that have lapsed are frequently referred to later committees continuing inquiries left uncompleted because of prorogation . 
in addition , over 10 precedents exist for this practice in the last 10 years , one of which I drew the attention of honourable senators to on November 3 . 
the reason for the acceptability of this practice is obvious . 
as I mentioned the last time the matter was raised by me in the Senate , allowing reports and evidence already taken by a committee in a previous session to be referred to a committee studying the same issue in a new session saves time and money and is , therefore , efficient . 
why require a committee to recall witnesses who have already testified on a matter ? 
we are wasting their time and the taxpayers ' money . 
some of these witnesses testified at the expense of the Senate and we would have to recall them again at the expense of the Senate . 
in addition , the honourable members of the committee have already given much of their valuable time to hear these witnesses and study the issues . 
why should we require them to give up more of their time to hear only the same evidence again ? 
there is no reason to have to do this given that the precedents have already been set for allowing the kind of motion I moved on Bill S - 6 . 
i also examined the references in Beauchesne to instructions to committees in order to attempt to understand the concern Senator Cools raised in this regard . 
the references can be found on pages 203 and 204 , paragraphs 681 to 685 . 
in the 22 nd edition of Erskine May , instructions are discussed at pages 515 to 519 . 
honourable senators , the motion I moved is not in the nature of an instructionas understood in Beauchesne and Erskine May . 
an instruction is defined as a motion empowering a committee to do something it could not otherwise do or to direct it to do something it might not otherwise do . 
the authorities also discuss the types of instructions that are inadmissible . 
paragraph 687 on page 204 of Beauchesne provides that : 
no Instruction is permissible which is irrelevant , foreign , contradictory or superfluous to the contents of the bill . 
the motion that I moved is not empowering the committee to do something that it would not otherwise have the power to do . 
all committees have the power to call witnesses and to take evidence . 
the only thing the Senate is authorizing the committee to do is to make use of evidence already received by a committee in a previous session in its current study of a bill . 
the procedural authorities and Senate practice clearly demonstrate the acceptability of my motion . 
logic and efficiency justify its continued use . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
motion to Authorize Committee to Study Developments Respecting Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Sharon Carstairs , pursuant to notice of November 18 , 1999 , moved : 
the progress on the implementation of the unanimous recommendations made in the report ; 
2 . Developments in Canada respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; 
3 . Developments in foreign jurisdictions respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than June 6 , 2000 . 
honourable senators , just so there is clarity among members of the chamber with respect to the objective of this committee , I wish senators to understand that in the period between June of 1995 to the present , some 10,000 copies of the report " Of Life and Death " have been distributed . 
it has now become the subject of a number of medical school courses and is actually used as part of their textual materials with respect to the issues of euthanasia and assisted suicide . 
however , it is not my intention to re - examine the principal decisions of this study with respect to euthanasia and assisted suicide because they were not unanimous decisions . 
it is my hope that this study will examine only the unanimous decisions that were made . 
honourable senators , I perceive that the scope of the study , provided that this motion meets the approval of the Senate , would do the following things . 
it would update the status of palliative care in Canada , including the progress of the implementation of the 1995 committee ' s unanimous recommendations . 
it would update the status of pain control and sedation practices in Canada , including the progress of the implementation of the 1995 committee ' s unanimous recommendations . 
it would update the status of the withholding and the withdrawing of life - sustaining treatment in Canada , including the progress of implementation of the 1995 committee ' s unanimous recommendations . 
it would update the status of advanced directives in Canada , including the progress and implementation of the 1995 committee ' s unanimous recommendations . 
i would update progress on the implementation of the unanimous recommendation that research be undertaken on requests for assisted suicide in Canada . 
it would update progress on the implementation of the unanimous recommendation that research be undertaken on requests for euthanasia in Canada . 
it would update progress on the implementation of a unanimous recommendation that a new Criminal Code charge of third degree murder be created . 
as well , it would update , where appropriate , information contained in the appendices to the report , including major events , court decisions and developments in foreign jurisdictions . 
honourable senators , I do not think that we need to go outside the Library of Parliament for staffing for this particular committee study . 
it would be my hope that we could begin this process almost immediately - that is , if it meets with the approval of the Senate - and that we would be easily able to table our report on June 6 , 2000 . 
travel is not foreseen , honourable senators , although I would like to see some use made of video - conferencing . 
i have asked the committee clerk to prepare a budget , which was always of interest to me in my other life . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , would the Honourable Senator Carstairs entertain a question for clarification ? 
senator Carstairs : 
Yes. 
senator Kinsella : 
the motion that is before us is for the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology to undertake this activity . 
is it your expectation that the committee would exercise the authority it has in the rules to designate a number of the members of that committee to form the group that would be doing the study ? 
senator Carstairs : 
yes , it would . 
the situation at the moment is that there are two members of the original committee sitting on the Social Affairs Committee , namely , Senator Lavoie - Roux and myself . 
i would also hope that they would be joined , when we were meeting in these discussions , not only by the five members of the Social Affairs Committee but also by the Honourable Senators Corbin , Keon , DeWare and Beaudoin . 
i have spoken to those senators and they have indicated that they would like to have some role in that ongoing study . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , I certainly concur in Senator Carstairs ' observations on this matter . 
i happen to use that particular report on life and death when I teach at university . 
i have discovered that students do not have to go to American literature for information . 
they report back to me and the essays that I read demonstrate that they learn a great deal from that report . 
by doing so , we will then have a continuing effective contribution in such a critical area . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Study State of Domestic and International Financial System 
hon. Leo E . Kolber , pursuant to notice of November 18 , 1999 , moved : 
that , the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce be authorized to examine and report upon the present state of the domestic and international financial system ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament and any other relevant Parliamentary papers and evidence on the said subject be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings ; 
that notwithstanding usual practices , the Committee be permitted to deposit an interim report on the said subject with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not sitting , and that the said report shall thereupon be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 31 , 2000 . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 11 
Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 
the Honourable Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Speaker Pro tempore 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
question of Privilege 
notice 
the Late Jeannine S é guin The Late Omer Deslauriers 
tributes 
tenth Anniversary of Pledge to Eradicate Child Poverty 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
aboriginal Peoples 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
second Report of Committee Presented 
third Report of Committee Presented 
national Finance 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
notice of Motion to Instruct the Standing Committee to which the Bill is Referred to Divide Bill into Two Bills 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Matters Related to Mandate 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee 
census Records 
presentation of Petition 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
increase in Capital Expenditures in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) - Possible Opening of New Embassies 
justice 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Impact of Government Initiative 
the Economy 
purchase of Major Companies by United States Firms - Government Policy 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Approach to Introduction of Conditions of Referendum 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Involvement of Other Provinces 
national Defence 
1994 White Paper - Government Policy 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
closing of CFB Cornwallis - Removal of Memorial Windows from St. George ' s Chapel 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
subject Matter Referred to Committee 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
question of Privilege 
speaker ' s Ruling 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
aboriginal Peoples 
royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples - Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations Respecting Aboriginal Governance and to Apply Papers and Evidence of Previous Session to Current Study 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Study Present State and Future of Forestry 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker pro tempore in the Chair . 
prayers . 
question of Privilege 
notice 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , you have received notice of a question of privilege I raised in accordance with rule 43 ( 5 ) , which reads as follows : 
immediately upon receipt of a notice required in sections ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) above , the Clerk of the Senate shall arrange for the immediate translation and dispatch , to each Senator ' s office address in Ottawa , of a copy of the original notice and the translation . 
i assume that all senators have received this notice . 
the question of privilege concerns certain leaks to the media , including today ' s leak to Le Soleil in Quebec City and The Toronto Star , of the second draft of the report by the Standing Committee on Transport and Communications on the reorganization of the airline industry in Canada . 
it is my intention today to address this question at the appropriate time and to propose that the matter be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
the Late Jeannine S é guin The Late Omer Deslauriers 
tributes 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I was saddened to learn of the death of Jeannine S é guin , a teacher by training . 
she was considered one of the most steadfast pillars of the local , national and international francophone community . 
francophone Ontario , especially , has lost a leader , and Canada is mourning the passing of a strong women , who had a hand in French - language education from the Maritimes to the Prairies . 
i knew Jeannine S é guin and I honour her today for her devotion to the francophone cause . 
she chaired the Association des enseignants franco - ontariens , the Association canadienne - fran ç aise de l ' Ontario and the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne du Canada . 
she distinguished herself through her great determination , her perseverance and her exceptional sense of the workings of politics . 
she devoted her life to education , promoting Canadian unity and the development of French - language educational institutions . 
this year has seen the departure of two great defenders of the Ontario francophone community . 
in the spring , we lost Omer Deslauriers . 
this man , like Jeannine S é guin , distinguished himself through his involvement in making education and health services accessible to Ontario francophones . 
we mourn today two people who have left their mark on our community . 
tenth Anniversary of Pledge to Eradicate Child Poverty 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
instead of being eliminated , child poverty has increased by 60 per cent in the last decade . 
approximately 460,000 more children are in desperate need . 
our efforts to eradicate child poverty have been deplorable . 
last night I attended a silent vigil at the Eternal Flame to mourn the failure of Canada ' s Parliament to meet its promised commitment to poor children . 
i speak today , honourable senators , on behalf of those hundreds of thousands of children across this rich land who continue to live in poverty , go to school hungry and live in substandard housing . 
they depended on the government to keep Parliament ' s word and fulfil their promise , but the promise was broken . 
in the past decade , high unemployment was cited as one of the major causes for the growing number of children with needs . 
still , as unemployment rates began to drop , child poverty continued to rise . 
why ? 
out of these meagre funds she is expected to feed , clothe and shelter both herself and her child . 
poor children awaken every morning to face the same bleak reality . 
how can they focus on learning when their living conditions are so poor ? 
they are robbed of a carefree childhood . 
we see evidence of anxiety , poor health , anti - social behaviour and delayed vocabulary development . 
this is unacceptable in a country that prides itself on a superior standard of living . 
the rate of poverty in Canada is almost a scandal . 
in the past decade , honourable senators , the government has drastically reduced funding to the provinces for the basic necessities - dollars that provided for social services , decent housing , health care and education . 
UI reform has been hardest on women whose qualifications for benefits hit an all - time low last year . 
deficits were eliminated at the expense of social programs . 
in fact , our national policies have all but abandoned our children in recent years . 
as we approach a new millennium , I implore the government to deliver on a promise to our children that never should have been broken . 
we have a glimmer of hope with the $ 6 million recently announced for social housing . 
let us add more dollars to that amount to be spent on long - term investments , income support and services for children to alleviate homelessness and to revisit employment insurance in the form of loosening the requirements and expanding the numbers who qualify . 
let us take a hard look at federal leadership in relation to the provinces in the delivery of social programs . 
discussion should not be about federal and provincial powers and who does what , but about what governments can do together to help people in need , lest we forget that the children of today will be the leaders and taxpayers of tomorrow . 
they deserve much better . 
we owe it to them and we owe it to Canada . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
aboriginal Peoples 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
second Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Jack Austin , Chairman of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 
the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , in accordance with rule 108 , and upon the request of its sponsor , the Honourable Senator Taylor , recommends the suspension of rule 106 in connection with a proposed private bill intituled : " An Act to amend the Act of incorporation of the Board of Elders of the Canadian District of the Moravian Church in America . " 
respectfully submitted , 
jack AUSTIN 
chairman 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Austin , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
third Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Jack Austin , Chairman of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 
the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on October 13 , 1999 to examine the question of privilege raised by the Honourable Senator Kinsella concerning a witness who appeared before the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry requests that , notwithstanding rule 92 ( 2 ) , it be empowered to hold its meetings in camera for the purpose of hearing witnesses . 
respectfully submitted , 
jack AUSTIN 
chairman 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Austin : 
with leave , now . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
No. 
on motion of Senator Austin , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
national Finance 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
notice of Motion to Instruct the Standing Committee to which the Bill is Referred to Divide Bill into Two Bills 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committeeto Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committeeto Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to sit while the Senate is sitting on Monday , November 29 , Tuesday , November 30 , and Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Meet DuringSitting of the Senate 
hon. Leo E . Kolber : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. today , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , may I ask the chairman why the committee must sit today ? 
leave has been granted , but may we find out why this is so important ? 
senator Kolber : 
the Banking Committee is starting today a study on the capital gains problems in this country , and we have very little time in which to complete the study , as we wish to finish a preliminary report before the end of the year . 
professor Reuven Brenner has written one of the seminal pieces on the subject and , with short notice , he has been able to come to Ottawa to appear before our committee . 
if we are to do our job , we believe we should start our study quickly . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i do not object to that , but perhaps chairmen who want their committees to sit while the Senate is sitting could give us more warning than the one we are getting now . 
it puts us and the witnesses in an embarrassing position . 
the work of senators is primarily to be in this chamber . 
the schedule of committees is to be honoured , as was laid out before senators took on their new jobs as chairmen and deputy chairmen and members . 
we on this side , unless there is an urgency - and I will accept that this may be one - will not be too sympathetic to giving leave , thus taking senators away from the chamber , where they should be while the Senate is sitting . 
senator Kolber : 
honourable senators , I have no doubt that our first responsibility is to be in the chamber . 
we also have a responsibility to get the work done . 
there are few days left in which to do that work . 
for the most part , these witnesses are well - known experts in their field . 
honourable senators , I am in your hands . 
if the honourable senator opposite wishes to meet with our leadership to change the committee ' s time slot , so be it . 
if he does not wish us to do our work , so be it . 
however , if we are to do our work , we should at least have a chance to get at it . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , if the chairman has problems with the time slots , we could accommodate him by giving him a slot on Monday or Friday , or any evening during the week . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Matters Related to Mandate 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources , in accordance with rule 86 ( 1 ) ( p ) , be authorized to examine such issues as may arise from time to time relating to energy , the environment , and natural resources generally in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report to the Senate no later than March 31 , 2000 . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committeeto Engage Services and Travel 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical , and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it ; and 
that the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , November 25 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
census Records 
presentation of Petition 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present a petition , with 190 signatures , from the Ontario Genealogical Society , petitioning the following : 
... your petitioners call upon Parliament to enact legislation to preserve the Post 1901 Census Records , remove them to the National Archives and make these , as well as future Census Records , available to the public after 92 years as is presently consistent with the many provisions of privacy legislation and time limits now in force . 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
increase in Capital Expenditures in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) - Possible Opening of New Embassies 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
we had the distinct pleasure of meeting with representatives of the Treasury Board earlier this week to review the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) . 
in part , we discussed appropriations to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade . 
have we opened any new embassies or consulates around the world , or are we in the process of doing so ? 
i understand that we are building a new embassy in Berlin due to the change in location of the capital of Germany from Bonn to Berlin . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as the honourable senator would appreciate , I do not have that information at hand . 
however , I will undertake to speak to the minister and provide the information to the honourable senator and to this chamber , if not tomorrow , early next week . 
senator Stratton : 
i would appreciate that very much . 
i understand the embassy in Berlin costs approximately $ 71 million and that the costs have escalated . 
however , that still leaves $ 60 million unaccounted for in the sense that we do not know where those costs arise . 
we have asked officials from the Treasury Board for a response in that regard . 
it may be more appropriate for the honourable leader to go to Treasury Board , obtain that information from them and table it here in this place , because I am curious as to where we are spending this $ 60 million . 
senator Tkachuk : 
that makes a real nice residence . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will make inquiries on behalf of the honourable senator and bring back to this chamber any information I am able to obtain . 
justice 
cost of Gun Registration Program - Responsibility of Minister 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , at the same meeting yesterday morning , Mr. Neville of the Treasury Board gave evidence on the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , specifically regarding the gun registration program . 
i asked him a number of questions about why an extra $ 35 million was needed when $ 40 million had been allocated in the original Estimates . 
Mr. Neville then calculated the cost of the gun registration program since 1995 . 
even I was shocked at the amount , which was $ 309 million . 
the government should know that this outrageous amount is what many parliamentarians and people opposed to the gun registration program were telling the government in 1994 and 1995 - namely , that its Estimates were far too low and that the program would cost hundreds of millions of dollars . 
we were all pooh - poohed by the government and told that we did not know what we were talking about . 
the minister , Mr. Rock , said that the amount would be only $ 85 million , which would take us to the end of the registration program , from 1995 to 2001 . 
the figure is now $ 309 million , with no end in sight . 
does the Leader of the Government share the view that Minister Rock is responsible for this tremendous miscalculation that is costing Canadian taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I take a slightly different interpretation of the response which was received from the senior official . 
senator Forrestall : 
why does he not accept that responsibility , then ? 
senator Boudreau : 
i realize that difficulties have been identified with respect to the registration process . 
senator Tkachuk : 
they were identified three years ago . 
senator Boudreau : 
in fact , a review was done this past May and recommendations were made to improve the operation . 
three quarters of all of the recommended service improvements have been implemented . 
we are now seeing an increased efficiency in the processing of applications . 
the numbers I have indicate that 8,500 licences are being processed and 35,000 guns are being registered per month . 
that does not specifically address the honourable senator ' s item , but it does indicate that a review of the process has taken place , improvements have been implemented and the system appears to be working . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , this is what always happens . 
the officials said it is the minister . 
i come here and ask the Leader of the Government who is responsible and he says that of course , the minister is always responsible , but we had all these problems . 
no one is ever responsible because if he were responsible , he would resign . 
senator Forrestall : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Tkachuk : 
he cannot have it both ways . 
if he does not resign , he says , " I am not responsible . " 
that is possible , too . 
perhaps the minister could inform us , if the minister is responsible , as he says , and he makes this tremendous mistake , what price should he pay ? 
why has he not resigned ? 
if he is not responsible , who in the bureaucracy is responsible ? 
perhaps the minister should launch a formal investigation to inform parliamentarians of who did this . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I understand the honourable senator ' s concerns regarding the overexpenditures of this particular program . 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
surely , the government now has an idea of what the overall cost will be . 
will it be $ 600 million , $ 800 million , $ 1 billion ? 
could you not tell this chamber the final estimated costs ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will certainly raise the matter with the minister responsible and provide any new information that is available to this chamber . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Impact of Government Initiative 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
honourable senators , while Canadians are worrying about economic and social issues , the Government of Canada has chosen , with one of its nice little improvisations , to artificially move the referendum question at the top of the agenda . 
why has the Government of Canada decided at this point to bring this issue again to the forefront of Canadian politics ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , if the Canadian government feels that it is appropriate to express its view on an issue as fundamental as this one , then clarity is an absolute necessity . 
clarity is required both with respect to the nature of the question and with respect to the result that is required to proceed . 
as to the best time to bring this issue forward publicly and give a clear government , no one time is preferable to another since the issue is not immediately before us . 
perhaps the government and the Prime Minister feel that this is an appropriate time , when we are not in the heat of battle , to provide the Government of Canada ' s views on these very important issues . 
senator Rivest : 
honourable senators , in the short term , and I do not know whether the minister is aware of this , the Prime Minister of Canada ' s initiative to raise this issue at this time seems unfortunately to be working in favour of the sovereignist option in Quebec . 
i do not know how the Canadian government perceives his initiative . 
there is much being said about a clear question . 
are the minister and the Government of Canada aware that their initiative - seemingly a unilateral one - far from adding to the cohesion of federalist forces in Quebec , is instead unfortunately adding to the confusion of those who need to defend the Canadian option in Quebec ? 
in the National Assembly this afternoon , Quebec Liberal Party leader Jean Charest dissociated himself publicly from the initiative taken by the Prime Minister of Canada . 
does the government think this unilateral approach to the referendum debate is good for Canadian unity ? 
would it not be preferable for the Government of Canada , the Government of Quebec and those of all the other provinces to show an attitude of open - mindedness and understanding in order to convince Quebecers to choose the Canadian option ? 
some Quebecers who are half - heartedly in favour of sovereignty would no doubt prefer the Canadian option . 
they must not be given arguments to the contrary . 
if a referendum were held in Quebec now , we would have the Parti Qu é b é cois on one side and Jean Chr é tien on the other . 
jean Charest and the Quebec Liberal Party would not really know which side to take . 
by formally raising the referendum issue without consulting the main spokesman for the federalist forces in Quebec , namely the Liberal Party of Quebec , are we helping Canadian unity ? 
by proceeding unilaterally , we are destabilizing the Quebec Liberal Party and the federalist forces in Quebec . 
i hope that this unfortunate incident will be forgotten by January or February 2000 . 
could the minister convince his cabinet colleagues , and particularly the Prime Minister and the Minister or Intergovernmental Affairs , to avoid taking actions that play into the hands of the separatists promoting Quebec ' s sovereignty ? 
could the minister try to encourage his colleagues to work in a positive and normal fashion with Quebec federalists to strengthen the federalist option in that province , instead of weakening it , as was unfortunately the case this week ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , it is clear that the Prime Minister views this issue as important and fundamental to the future of the country . 
his view with respect to referenda and separation is beyond question . 
on that fundamental issue , there is no disagreement . 
out of respect for the people of Quebec who would vote in a possible future referendum , we would have a role to play to ensure that the question is clear . 
it is important that we express that view , and I think it is the opinion of the Prime Minister that that view must be expressed . 
there are those who would say that the Government of Canada should be a bystander , a voyeur , in any referendum process in Quebec , regardless of how confusing the question might be or how questionable the result . 
senator Rivest : 
is the Leader of the Government in the Senate suggesting that during the 1980 referendum , the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau was a mere bystander ? 
senator Boudreau : 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton , Leader of the Opposition : 
honourable senators , we are trying to determine to what extent the Government of Canada expects to involve itself in a referendum process in Quebec . 
we have received mixed signals . 
should the government be unhappy with the question prepared and approved by the National Assembly , will it superimpose its own question ? 
the word " clarity " comes up repeatedly . 
in the final analysis , who will determine which question meets the test of clarity ? 
will it be the Government of Canada or the National Assembly of Quebec ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the Supreme Court , in its very wise decision , indicated that there is a role in the process for the Government of Canada . 
last evening , I had the opportunity to hear the comments the Prime Minister made yesterday during Question Period in the other place . 
discussions are ongoing , as the Prime Minister indicated , and I am sure that when he is ready , his views , on behalf of the Government of Canada , will be known in more detail . 
at that time , I will be happy to provide more detail than I am able to give today . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I remind the minister that it was not a judgment or decision of the Supreme Court but an opinion , and that no directives were given to any government . 
the Supreme Court was asked to rule on three questions referred to it by the Government of Canada . 
i also remind the minister that the Province of Quebec refused to appear before the Supreme Court and that a lawyer was appointed by the court to represent the province . 
three answers were given , " No , no , no . " 
unfortunately , in my opinion , the Supreme Court went far beyond the reference and decided to establish certain guidelines regarding whatever the question and answer might be . 
in my opinion , that , sadly , gave legitimacy to the separation process . 
thanks to the Supreme Court , for the first time , it became legitimate to discuss the possibility of separation , because the court established guidelines and rules for how the referendum process should be carried out and what should happen should the result be against Canada . 
i believe that that went beyond the mandate of the Supreme Court . 
in any event , why does the Government of Canada not tell us what question it would find acceptable , tell the Government of Quebec that the response to this question is the only response to which it will give credibility , and then let Quebecers decide ? 
what is the question that the Government of Canada believes should be asked of Quebecers ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , if it ever comes to this , I assume that the question will be initiated by the Quebec National Assembly . 
i do not anticipate that the Government of Canada will be interested in creating a question for submission to the people of Quebec on the issue of separation . 
with respect to the Supreme Court decision , that is a matter of opinion . 
the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton has given his opinion of the comments made by the Supreme Court . 
i think that many believe that those comments have been very useful and have indicated the type of involvement the people of Canada want their government to have in any process that may arise in the future . 
it is hoped that such a process will never arise . 
for the benefit of the people of Quebec and all of Canada , may there never be another referendum question . 
the Economy 
purchase of Major Companies by United States Firms - Government Policy 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last year , the government turned down the proposed merger of Canada ' s leading banks . 
we now know that this political decision has done irreparable damage to the Canadian economy . 
this government has failed to produce a white paper or legislation that will free our leading financial institutions of regulatory burden to permit them to compete internationally . 
in today ' s Financial Post , Peter Godsoe , the highly respected Chairman and CEO of ScotiaBank , expresses deep concerns for the future of Canada ' s major corporations . 
Mr. Godsoe said that our large , widely held companies must compete with the best of the Americas and that we must have public policies that do not penalize them but encourage them to be competitive externally . 
will the honourable Leader of the Government tell us what plan this government has for a public policy debate that will ensure that some of our leading major companies can stay in Canada and not be bought up by American companies ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with the emergence of the global economy , there has been an increased flow of investment into Canadian companies from the United States . 
there has been a corresponding flow of substantial investment by Canadians into American firms . 
investment flows both ways across the border . 
i cannot put my hands on the figures immediately , but I undertake to provide them to the honourable senator when I can get them . 
there are some who are very concerned about American investment in particular sectors of our economy . 
other sectors of our economy would be very glad to have investment from any source . 
i refer in particular to businesses in my and the Honourable Senator Oliver ' s native province . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , last week , former Alberta premier and well - respected corporate director Peter Lougheed warned Canadians that our economic sovereignty is being eroded by the devalued dollar and high taxes . 
there are other reports in our newspapers that some senior ministers in the government fear that the Prime Minister is blocking debate on the future of our economy . 
Mr. Godsoe has asked the government if it will commence a national policy debate on the role of our large companies . 
will the Leader of the Government initiate such a debate ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister is available on a daily basis in the other place for questioning on this topic . 
as well , there is an opportunity for debate in that context , as there is here for that matter . 
with respect to the question concerning increased U.S. investment in Canadian companies , in some instances it may be a matter of concern , while in others it is quite considerably a matter of opportunity . 
for areas of the country and specific sectors of our economy that have not had investment from any source in the past , increased American investment is most welcome . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Approach to Introduction of Conditions of Referendum 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , my question is supplementary to those concerning the intentions of the government with regard to possible future referenda in Quebec . 
it is clear from what the leader has said , along with statements made by the Prime Minister and Mr. Dion , that some action is planned by the government . 
how does the government intend to proceed ? 
will it be by way of a bill , by way of a resolution , or by way of a simple policy statement ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is clear that some action is being seriously contemplated by the government . 
indeed , the Prime Minister indicated last evening in a public interview , which I had the opportunity to see , that some action with respect to the federal government ' s view on the issue of clarity might be done any number of ways . 
the three that the Prime Minister mentioned in his response were by way of legislation , by resolution or through a public policy statement put forward by either the Prime Minister or some other senior government member . 
the Prime Minister indicated that the discussion was ongoing and that he was not in a position to indicate at this time how the government might contemplate making its views known . 
i can add no more to what the Prime Minister said . 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Involvement of Other Provinces 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , my second question concerns what the minister referred to as the " ongoing discussions " . 
specifically , I should like to know whether these ongoing discussions involve the provinces . 
in the Supreme Court ' s response to the reference of the government there was reference to all the partners to Confederation . 
am I right in assuming that , in the view of the government , all the partners includes 10 provinces and the federal government ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the specific reference that the Prime Minister made was to discussions which were occurring among his colleagues and himself . 
to what extent there were further discussions , if any , I am not aware at the moment . 
in fact , yesterday , I indicated that it would not surprise me if provinces , as well , were interested in expressing their views on issues of clarity . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , the 30 - minute Question Period is now over . 
is leave granted to continue ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
national Defence 
1994 White Paper - Government Policy 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I wish to clarify whether or not the defence white paper of 1994 remains the definitive statement and position of the present government on matters of defence . 
if that view has changed , has there been any notice given to Parliament or any formal consultation with the public ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I believe the honourable senator asked me the same question yesterday afternoon . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask a general question , then , of the minister . 
has there been any policy change ? 
i am concerned about helicopters . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as we discussed previously this program is the top priority for the Minister of National Defence . 
certainly , it is an initiative that I support and encourage . 
i hope that we will be able to say something positive in the near future . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , yesterday , in the other place , the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of National Defence had this to say with regard to the matter : 
it is on the minister ' s desk , and it is up to him to make a decision . 
you tell us that it is a priority . 
why will the minister not make a decision ? 
is it because there has been a change in defence policy ? 
the minister ' s policy briefing in this respect sets forth very clearly the timetable for the replacement of the shipborne Sea Kings . 
which is it ? 
why has a decision not been made , if the statement of requirement is a priority and is on the minister ' s desk for initialling ? 
an office has been set up to deal with the matter . 
i should like to know what it costs to maintain an office that is doing nothing . 
it is like maintaining an old railway coach in case someone wants to go for a drive in it once a year . 
what is the answer ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the concern of the honourable senator on this issue . 
senator Forrestall : 
no , I do not think you do . 
senator Boudreau : 
on a regular basis , I convey his representations to the honourable minister , who reassures me , on each occasion I do so , that it remains his top priority . 
hopefully , we will be able to respond with a positive result in the near future . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , November 4 was when I last asked a question with respect to this matter . 
the Sea King ' s life expectancy ends in 2005 . 
it will be eight years before they are replaced , leaving us a three - year gap with no helicopters . 
there are a number of options . 
i am curious as to whether or not the government will send our ships to sea without helicopters . 
will they borrow some helicopters from the United States navy ? 
will the department start yet another upgrade - God forbid - on the Sea King that could possibly put ships and crews in peril ? 
what will the government do and when does it intend to make an announcement about it ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the minister is well aware of all the alternatives , including the ones that the honourable senator has mentioned . 
hopefully , the matter will be brought forward as quickly as possible . 
that is as good and complete an answer as I can give the honourable senator at this time . 
closing of CFB Cornwallis - Removal of Memorial Windows from St. George ' s Chapel 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , last week I asked the Leader of the Government in the Senate a question concerning the removal of the stained glass windows from the chapel at Cornwallis . 
he responded by saying that there were more people in the capital city of Nova Scotia and , therefore , it would be better that the windows be maintained where more people can see them . 
at that time , I was not able to pursue the matter any further . 
however , I am offended by that excuse . 
based on that logic , does that mean that all moveable treasures from the non - urban regions of Nova Scotia should be moved to Halifax ? 
if we were to follow that logic to the end , perhaps we should move the Evangeline statue from Grand Pr é over to Halifax where more people would see it . 
the Honourable Senator Boudreau , who has now moved to Halifax , should know that it is offensive to all non - Haligonians to suggest that the stained glass windows should be moved to Halifax from Cornwallis because there are more people in Halifax . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my answer was not cast in quite such stark tones as the honourable senator indicated . 
as I understand it , the facility in which the windows were previously located was virtually unused almost all year , used perhaps on only one or two occasions throughout the year . 
senator Comeau : 
honourable senators , I have a final supplementary question . 
i know the minister is receiving quite a bit of information , from veterans who went through Cornwallis and who paid for the windows , with respect to the undertaking that was made to them by the Department of National Defence , that the windows would be returned once the facility was put in place . 
i do hope that the minister will look at this issue seriously . 
although he may be considering running in a Halifax seat in the next election - Halifax West , I hear - he should not let this cloud his good judgment . 
much as I love the city of Halifax , one of the nicest cities in all of Canada , I still suggest that the non - urban areas of Nova Scotia cannot afford to lose their local treasures . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would disagree with the honourable senator on one item and agree with him on another . 
on the question of Halifax being one of the most beautiful cities in Canada , I would disagree . 
i regard it as the most beautiful city in the world . 
senator Kinsella : 
why ? 
what is wrong with Ottawa ? 
senator Boudreau : 
with respect to the general principle over which the honourable senator expresses concern , I do not think we want to see any wholesale movement of the heritage of Nova Scotia into a central area , so I will re - examine this issue . 
senator Forrestall : 
have you found the pews yet , minister ? 
senator Boudreau : 
i must also put on the record a denial that I have selected any seat for future contest . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lewis , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to Bill C - 6 . 
as my comments unfold , honourable senators will see that they are not a formal presentation on the bill . 
this is a bill that has been on the Order Paper for some time and has been the subject of some very good debate . 
i congratulate the sponsor of the bill , Senator Kirby , as well as Senators Murray , Finestone , Oliver and Keon for their important contributions to the Senate ' s understanding of the bill . 
from their speeches , I heard general support for the bill , with , however , some expressions of concern , highlighted in particular by a notice of motion given earlier today by Senator Murray . 
i should like to speak mostly with respect to the process involved in dealing with Bill C - 6 . 
speaking as Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate , I must say that we are very anxious to see this bill go to committee . 
i personally have received a number of representations - as I am sure have all honourable senators - from potential witnesses who wish to appear before the committee , some of whom have concerns about the legislation in its present form and would like an opportunity to be heard with respect to what they think could be done to improve the bill . 
as I mentioned earlier , some honourable senators who have debated the bill have expressed similar concerns . 
to get the bill to committee is the objective that I seek in my role as deputy leader , so that these witnesses can be heard and we can get on with the business of dealing with this legislation . 
however , I am sensitive to the need to accommodate debate on the legislation , and now we have a notice of motion with respect to dividing the bill . 
we have even had comments from Senator Finestone on our side as to consideration of an amendment to the bill . 
i have been in discussions with my counterpart , Senator Kinsella , Deputy Leader of the Opposition , as rule 38 invites us to do , with the objective of trying to reach an agreement on how this bill should be dealt with in the context of the concerns expressed by honourable senators . 
the suggestion has been made by my counterpart that , perhaps , the best way to conclude an agreement on how to deal with this bill would be for me to make my points before the chamber today so that my proposal is completely transparent to all senators . 
then , if other honourable senators wish to comment on what I will propose , fine . 
i will then invite Senator Kinsella , either by questions to me or by using his time for comments on the bill , to make his comments on the proposal so that all honourable senators will know what is happening and why . 
bill C - 6 is at second reading stage , and it seems important to the opposition that it remain there until such time as some matters of amendment have had a full and fair opportunity to be considered . 
i put it to them that that would be better done with the benefit of the committee ' s work in considering the bill . 
what I am about to suggest is not a motion but a proposal for a possible motion . 
if deemed appropriate , leave can be obtained from honourable senators . 
this is how I would suggest we deal with this bill . 
before I make the suggestion , however , in order for the mover and the principal speaker for the opposition to speak , they will have to obtain leave . 
speaking as Deputy Leader of the Government , I am prepared to give that leave to facilitate this attempt to have an agreement reached on the floor of the Senate . 
i should mention as well that this is not the first time that a proposal of this type has been put forward during my time here . 
i know that Senator Frith and Senator Doody , when they were both deputy leaders of their respective parties , followed this procedure on occasion . 
it is not something that I expect to do often . 
therefore , this is an attempt to move the bill forward in a way that will give the Senate the necessary flexibility to deal with concerns about the bill . 
honourable senators , I will propose , following our discussion , that the subject matter of Bill C - 6 be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , with the instruction that it be reported back on December 2 , 1999 ; that it be reported back in two reports , one dealing with Part 1 of the bill and the other with Parts 2 to 5 of the bill ; that completion of debate on second reading will follow ; and that any further committee consideration of this bill be carried out in Committee of the Whole . 
i am not moving that motion at this time . 
while this is not in the ordinary course of the Senate carrying out its work , it is close to the ordinary course for us and is not a variation that we should be concerned with on either side . 
however , this is something that I will invite my counterpart , Senator Kinsella , to comment upon , either by way of question to me or by way of speech , and then I shall take advantage of my opportunity to question him . 
we may hear from other honourable senators on this matter , in particular Senator Kirby and Senator Murray . 
at the conclusion of this discussion or debate , I will then ask for leave to put forward a motion , the nature of which I have outlined in the context of my remarks . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , as the Honourable Senator Hays has noted , having already spoken on the bill , I would require leave to respond now to the proposal . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I thank the Deputy Leader of the Government for his comments and for his proposal . 
as he has correctly stated , there is general support in this chamber for the principle and purpose of this bill . 
however , there are problems , which some of us have alluded to in our speeches at second reading . 
what I have to say now I can say very briefly , and I say it without prejudice to the notice of motion I placed before you earlier today . 
it is a matter of indifference to me whether we refer the bill or , as the honourable senator has suggested , the subject matter of the bill to the committee this week . 
if Senator Hays believes that doing so will properly expedite consideration of the bill and , especially , consideration of some of the problems that have been raised , then I would give that my full support . 
that being said , I am not clear on one point . 
did the deputy leader suggest a reporting date for the committee ? 
senator Hays : 
senator Murray : 
that is what I was afraid I heard . 
let me explain . 
senator Kirby , the chairman of the committee , invited me yesterday to attend a meeting of the steering committee with himself and Senators Carstairs and LeBreton . 
at that meeting we reviewed a list of potential witnesses - that is , people who have indicated a desire to appear before the committee to express their views on the bill . 
as I think the chairman of the committee would confirm , it is a long list indeed . 
i expressed the view at that meeting that I was more interested in - if I may put it this way - quality rather than quantity . 
my concern was that the main points of view be placed on the table and be explored in depth . 
it occurred to me that it may not be necessary to hear as many witnesses as have expressed a desire to appear . 
however , it would be Senator Kirby ' s disagreeable duty to persuade people that they did not need to be heard . 
this is always difficult . 
my point is that trying to complete the work of the committee on the subject matter of the bill by December 2 would be a travesty and would properly subject the Senate and the committee to considerable criticism . 
honourable senators , others may wish to speak to this matter . 
i have no objection whatsoever , in principle , to sending the subject matter of the bill to the committee now and having the Committee of the Whole look at the bill when the report comes back to this chamber . 
the government is concerned about the progress of this legislative . 
however , if the government can be persuaded to accept an amendment that would solve the problems that have been raised here , notably in the health care sector , then I would want us to deal with that amendment and get it out of the Senate and to the House of Commons in good time for them to deal with it before their adjournment on December 17 . 
honourable senators , those are the parameters of the situation as I see them . 
the chairman or other members of the committee may wish to speak at this time . 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I , too , will need leave to speak , since speaking to this matter in the normal course would have the effect of closing debate , and it is not my intention to close second reading debate . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , as usual , perhaps because Senator Murray and I were both previously chiefs of staff to Maritime premiers , I find myself in complete agreement with everything he has said . 
regional affinity is much stronger than party affinity in some cases . 
the reality is that many witnesses have asked to appear before the committee . 
whether the subject matter of the bill is referred to Committee of the Whole or to the Social Affairs Committee , with the understanding that my committee would come back with two reports , is immaterial to me . 
we are happy to do either . 
when Senator Murray talks about wanting to do something more in depth rather than breadth - if I can use that analogy - I believe he means that there is a clear need to make sure we understand exactly the issue with respect to health care , and I agree with him . 
in the proposed motion outlined by Senator Hays , it is clear that as to a definitive reporting date , the essential thing is that we proceed with our work expeditiously . 
we would need to sit starting at noon on Monday and proceed into the evening , repeating the same schedule on Tuesday and Wednesday . 
that was the rationale behind my notice of motion . 
like Senator Murray , I believe we must proceed to deal with this issue expeditiously . 
as he says , if the committee appeared to be coming to the conclusion that an amendment to the bill was warranted , like him , I feel it would be important that this chamber get the bill back to the other place in time for them to deal with it before the Christmas recess . 
on balance , I am in agreement with Senator Murray . 
i have no difficulty with the essence of Senator Hays ' s proposed motion , as long as we take the date out and come to an understanding , either in writing or an understanding in this place , that the committee would proceed with the bill expeditiously and deal with it in an efficient manner . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i believe we have canvassed and have identified a model that meets the mutual agreement of the government side and the opposition side in the chamber . 
i think that we should refer today the subject matter of the bill to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
the understanding is that the committee would proceed with its work forthwith , and proceed expeditiously , providing every opportunity to hear from those witnesses it deems necessary . 
as a result of the issue that has been raised in debate - the suggestion that perhaps the committee would consider providing one report , with two parts , or two separate reports - it would not matter . 
the committee would canvass the views of its members and express an opinion based on those views . 
we are cognizant of the parliamentary timetable involving the other house . 
i can speak on behalf of the opposition side that there would be no obstruction in terms of communicating to the other place that a good report and a good decision had been taken by this chamber . 
in terms of our procedure , I would be happy to move a motion , while I have the floor , unless any other honourable senator wishes to speak on this matter . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , perhaps I should make a comment as to the willingness on our side to vary the motion to delete the reporting back date and , at the same time , to delete reference to the Committee of the Whole . 
having heard Honourable Senators Murray and Kinsella , I am satisfied that that is not a necessity for us . 
accordingly , I would agree to the motion that I have now circulated being put without reference to that . 
if that is what Senator Kinsella has in mind , I would not object and would support that . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a matter of clarification , because I must admit that I am a little confused as to what , exactly , we are being asked to do . 
how will the witnesses that Senator Kirby has told us are anxious to speak to the bill help the committee on the subject matter ? 
i do not understand how all these witnesses who have a particular axe to grind on Part 1 or Part 2 , or whatever clause it is , will be helpful in the purpose of referring the subject matter back to the committee . 
i do not know what we are trying to achieve here . 
i do not want to muddy the waters , but it would seem to me that we should be doing this in two parts . 
i sense that we will marry the two , subject matter and bill , and I do not know what will come out of it . 
if we go into Committee of the Whole , will the witnesses who appeared before the committee on the subject matter be asked to come back before Committee of the Whole to speak to the bill itself ? 
i should like to have clarification on the procedure and the process that we are being asked to follow . 
is this heading in the direction that the government intends it to ? 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , perhaps I could answer that . 
i am a novice in these matters , but I had some of the same concerns that were expressed by the honourable senator . 
there are technical aspects to this . 
if the bill is to remain at second reading stage , then it should remain on the Order Paper . 
to keep the bill on the Order Paper , it needs to be kept here . 
the motion has been put the way it is to ensure that the committee has all means at its disposal to study all aspects of the bill , namely , the subject matter of the bill , while the bill still remains at second reading stage , to accommodate what my understanding is of the concern on the other side , and that is that there is reservation about splitting the bill and that has not been resolved . 
this is a way to have the bill considered without compromising that procedural right . 
we have a majority on this side , but you have tools on your side . 
the whole purpose of this is to try to have a solution under rule 38 as opposed to rule 39 . 
it appears that it is going very well . 
i would hope that we could expect a motion . 
i do not think that the bill or its study is compromised in any way by having the subject matter before the committee as opposed to the bill , for the reasons that I stated . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , if I may , the formulation of sending the subject matter of a bill to committee is identical with that that we used in the good old days when pre - study was permitted in this chamber . 
obviously , we were not able procedurally to send a bill to committee before we received a bill from the House of Commons . 
nevertheless , once the bill was tabled in the House of Commons , to facilitate its consideration in the Senate we would send the subject matter to the appropriate committee . 
that committee would hear witnesses just as if the bill were before it . 
that committee would report to the Senate . 
we were then at complete liberty , if we wished , once we received the bill , to send it back to committee and hear further witnesses . 
more often than not , when the bill arrived , we had obtained satisfaction from the government undertakings about amendments , and so forth , before the bill left the House of Commons . 
the committee stage frequently turned out to be pro forma , but the formulation that we are using here , which Senator Hays proposed to use reporting the subject matter , is a time - honoured one in the Senate . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I have never heard of the Senate doing a pre - study of a bill that has already been passed in the House of Commons . 
senator Murray : 
no , but there are precedents , quite a few of them , for what Senator Hays is proposing . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
senator Hays has proposed that the subject matter go to committee and the bill stay here . 
senator Murray : 
right , and there are precedents for that . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
does that mean that the witnesses who come before the committee are limited to the subject matter , or can they sneak in a copy of the bill anyway ? 
senator Murray : 
no , they are not limited in that respect . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it is all a facade , is that what you are saying ? 
senator Murray : 
it is a procedural device . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i do not know who is best served by it . 
why are we going through this two - stage effort when , in effect , it will be the one effort ? 
if I am the only who does not understand , I will end my participation right now . 
i do not understand why the subject matter of a bill before the Senate is being sent to a committee to hear witnesses who will talk about the subject matter when they really want to talk about the bill . 
can they talk about the bill even if it is not before the committee ? 
i do not understand that part of the procedure . 
senator Forrestall : 
it is the same bill . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
why not send the bill , then , and get it over with ? 
i am not here to help the government . 
i am here simply to understand the procedure and to facilitate it . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , the procedural device is being used to accommodate the concerns of Senator Murray . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that is good enough for me , then . 
senator Hays : 
we could send the subject matter of the bill , but it would be better to give the bill second reading and send it as we normally do . 
we have been in communication with the sponsor of the bill and the principal speaker on the other side , Senator Murray . 
we have arrived at the this proposal , which is essentially an agreement , done in a transparent way on the floor of the Senate as opposed to presenting honourable senators with a fait accompli which , undoubtedly , would have raised , aside from Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s question , a large number of other questions . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , from time to time , a bit of creativity is always helpful . 
the Honourable Senator Hays has attempted to contribute a bit to the creativity . 
however , we thought it would be wise to have our discussion in the chamber so that everyone may understand exactly what we are doing . 
one of the great advantages of this approach , of course , is that if there are serious and honest views held on both sides of the chamber as to whether or not there is more than one principle contained in this bill , then we can have the substance explicated through the testimony adduced from witnesses . 
in this way , we can receive advice from the committee before we actually vote on the principle of the bill . 
indeed , one hypothesis is that if the committee were to recommend that we split the bill , it would help to solve the problem . 
if the committee were to come back with amendments , it might solve the problem . 
many opportunities lay before the committee . 
this is a creative way of dealing with the matter . 
perhaps Senator Hays would now like to move his motion . 
subject Matter Referred to Committee 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( e ) , I move : 
that the subject matter of Bill C - 6 , An Act to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology ; and 
that it be reported back in two reports : one dealing with Part 1 of the Bill and the other Parts 2 - 5 of the Bill and completion of debate on second reading to follow . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I wish to ask a question for the purpose of clarification . 
i have no intentions of holding up this matter . 
does this require a unanimous vote or simply a majority vote ? 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , " leave " anticipates unanimity . 
any one senator here could stop this process by refusing to grant me leave to move the motion . 
in effect , it requires unanimity . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , with leave , I should like to revert to the rubric Notices of Motions . 
in light of the motion which has just been passed , I seek leave of the Senate to permit the committee to meet today at 3:30 , purely for purposes of discussing the witness list . 
we could then begin to hear witnesses tomorrow at our regular time , which is eleven o ' clock . 
i think the committee will want to have a bit of discussion so that we can lay out a witness schedule . 
i should like to do that at our regular sitting time , which it at 3:30 today . 
therefore , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. today , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I rise to make a small point . 
i believe the honourable senator rose and asked for leave to revert to Notices of Motions . 
before leave was given to revert to Notices of Motions , he then proceeded to make his motion . 
i have no problem with granting Senator Kirby leave in both instances . 
however , we should be aware that it was a two - stage process that should have been followed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , this is the second time today we have given leave for a committee to sit while the Senate is sitting . 
i leave that with the government as a suggestion . 
we should abide by the schedule on Wednesdays and compromise by saying that at 3:30 or 4:00 p.m. we will adjourn no matter where we are on the Order Paper . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . ( L ' Acadie - Acadia ) , for the second reading of Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I am quite disappointed that the sponsor of the bill is not here again today to deal with this bill . 
yesterday , I listened carefully as Senator Lynch - Staunton spoke to Bill S - 3 . 
he opened an interesting and important area of inquiry . 
it speaks to the matter of the human rights record of one of the countries that would be party to this treaty , namely Uzbekistan . 
it seems to me , honourable senators , that the serious question that should be in the mind of each honourable senator is whether we , as a country , want to send a signal and get the attention of authorities in Uzbekistan , in terms of their human rights record . 
senator Lynch - Staunton quoted from two reports of Human Rights Watch , which spoke of documented human rights violations , and also advised us that our own Department of Foreign Affairs has a number of documents relating to the unacceptable human rights record in that country . 
honourable senators , notwithstanding our stated foreign policy of constructive engagement , which we have had an opportunity to speak on from time to time in this chamber , we are dealing in this instance with a bilateral relationship . 
it seems to me that , if constructive engagement is to mean anything , it would mean a great deal if we said to a country , " Sorry , we are not prepared to sign a treaty with you because of your domestic human rights record . " 
that would be exactly why we would exclude that particular country from Bill S - 3 . 
honourable senators , the matter of gross and consistent patterns of human rights violations is not something that we , as a free and democratic society , ought ever to take lightly . 
as honourable senators know , resolution 1503 of the United Nations speaks directly to the matter of gross and consistent patterns of human rights violations and the obligation on all members of the international community to take positive steps and to lend their direct support for the elimination of such patterns of consistent and gross violations of human rights . 
honourable senators , this is a classic opportunity for Canada to make a very pronounced and honourable statement . 
we can say that we are not holding up the treaties with respect to several of the countries that are contained in the bill but only with respect to this particular country , because of the particular , verified , gross and consistent patterns of human rights violations . 
that will allow us to say that we do not wish to enter into a treaty with that country . 
honourable senators , whether we focus on the Vienna conventions that deal with international treaty implementation or on some of the specific international human rights treaties , such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , these are all treaties that Canada , along with many other nations around the world , has entered into , adopted , embraced and implemented , and we should pay heed to the human rights contained in those treaties . 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Lynch - Staunton for drawing to our attention the fact that this is a treaty that the Government of Canada is proposing we would enter into with that particular country under the same rubric of treaty law as the human rights treaties that we have entered into . 
therefore , honourable senators , I think that it is terribly important for this chamber to make a statement . 
we can decide whether we want to move an amendment to the bill at second reading , prior to sending it to committee , or whether it would be a wiser course of action , now that we have raised this and it is in the record of the chamber , to send the bill to committee so that the honourable senators on the committee could seize upon this issue and ensure that officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and other witnesses would speak directly to this matter that has been apprehended by our colleague Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the honourable senator . 
i did not have the liberty of listening to or reading Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s speech , but the principle he evokes is quite interesting . 
we have had an exchange about this from time to time , not only here but in other fora . 
he is focusing on one country . 
is the honourable senator suggesting that , as a condition precedent to passing a bilateral taxation measure , we should , as they do in the United States from time to time , do a human rights review of each country that is a party to that particular agreement ? 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Grafstein for that question . 
as the first part of my response , I can say that I have no difficulty with that model of human rights vigilance . 
the experience in a lot of countries , including the United States , which attempted particularly under the Carter regime to do that , has not been as satisfactory as one would have hoped . 
i reluctantly accept the doctrine of constructive engagement . 
my reluctance arises because I do not see the public administrative glove to which the hand belongs . 
i do not see , in the protocols that govern the conduct of our trade officials or our foreign officers , anything that says that they must indicate and document in their monthly or annual reports the occasions on which they raised human rights questions so that there will be some kind of a public administrative verification that constructive engagement actually does work . 
while I think the principle is acceptable theoretically , I do not see it as having universal application . 
in this particular instance , we have a specific tax treaty . 
it is a bilateral matter . 
this bill has grouped many countries under one bill , but unfortunately , there is one country with a record of human rights that has brought this issue to the forefront . 
the second part of my answer is that I am certainly of the view that I would want us to be surgical and very focused in dealing with these bilateral treaties . 
i would look at the domestic human rights record of each country as a matter of course , and I would make a judgment in terms of whether I want to do business of this nature with them or whether , indeed , as a foreign policy instrument , I would want to use these kinds of measures to get their attention . 
senator Grafstein : 
as the honourable senator knows , the United States has a model , which we have not adopted - although it seems the new foreign minister is moving in that direction with his new policy of human security - of making an assessment , year by year , for every country , sometimes regionally , of gross violations of human rights . 
they are published regularly by the State Department and they are debated in both Houses in the United States . 
we have chosen not to follow that model . 
we have assiduously chosen not to engage in linkage . 
i do not know which side of the coin I would ultimately favour in light of the new policy of human security that has been articulated by the minister responsible for external affairs and echoed by the Prime Minister . 
however , if we are to engage in this matter , it would be better to have a debate here , as a general policy , and permit all honourable senators to conclude as to where they are going , as opposed to picking on one country in a particular bill . 
i look at the face of this bill for the first time and I see that there are one or two , perhaps three , other countries , based on newspaper reports - and I want to be very careful here - where one can probably make the same claim , which is a systematic pattern of gross violation of human rights . 
i commend the honourable senator opposite for raising this matter . 
i prefer his comment as to whether or not , before we undertake any form of " ad hockerry " , we should participate in this debate and look at this as a systemic issue as it applies to legislation of this nature , generally speaking . 
i would then be more comfortable that we are working within a framework as opposed to working through inspiration . 
senator Kinsella : 
one response that comes to mind in answer to the honourable senator ' s question is that , on the one hand , it is necessary to respond vigorously to ill - will violations of human rights . 
if you are apprehending this in a very clear manner , then you move to respond to that direct ill - will human rights violation . 
on the systemic or institutional or historical type of discrimination , I agree with you wholeheartedly . 
there must be a more thoughtful and broad - based policy . 
all international politics get drawn into it , including trade and self - interest dynamics . 
yet , every case of human rights violations need not wait for amelioration of the human rights environment to remove that poison environment to a systemic or institutionalized kind of response . 
there are cases where you can apprehend and deal directly with it . 
in the national interest , I do not feel that we need this treaty ; however , it is a nice thing to have . 
it is good to have treaties with a variety of countries . 
however , it would be very much an attention - getting act if the Parliament of Canada were to say that it would exclude a certain country . 
no doubt there have been discussions at the officials ' level before the bill reached this stage and they would be asking why . 
they would also look at our debate and our discussion this afternoon and realize that Canadians are serious about human rights standards . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I should like to add to what my colleague Senator Kinsella has said . 
i concur with him . 
honourable senators , I believe we should look at this matter . 
yesterday ' s discussion fits well with the discussion we are having today because we are talking about a bilateral relationship with a number of different states . 
we have similar agreements , protocols and conventions with nearly every state in the world . 
senator Kinsella indicated that dealing with the state that is the subject of this debate offends his sense of appropriateness , in that it is a state that has a record of human rights abuses . 
however , I believe Senator Kinsella would agree with me that there are literally dozens of countries that have a similar record of human rights abuses . 
i would also like to ensure that we understand that we are not just talking about signing an agreement . 
we are talking about signing an agreement where we exchange information about corporations and individuals and the affairs of Canadians with some of these foreign countries . 
that concerns me because , frankly , I do not trust some of these states to keep that information in confidence . 
if I am doing business with one of these states , as with Talisman in Sudan right now , I would have to accept the risk that some of the information that my country would be sharing about me and my company with the Sudanese government may not be as protected in privacy as it would be under the laws of some other countries in the world . 
that is another aspect that we should examine more closely . 
i raised that question yesterday because several months ago we dealt with a similar bill at the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , where we raised these same questions we are asking today . 
i do not feel that we never received answers to those questions . 
i would suggest that the appropriate committee to which to send this bill is the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
we can pick up on the comments made by Senators Lynch - Staunton , Kinsella and Grafstein and continue to engage the departmental officials in the questions that we asked the last time we dealt with a similar piece of legislation . 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , I am pleased that the Leader of the Opposition raised this issue . 
it is part of the emerging debate about where human rights belongs on the agenda of Canada . 
the issue of Uzbekistan was raised , as well as Sudan and other areas . 
there seems to be an ad hoc manner of responding to these concerns . 
i am of the opinion that one cannot apply a one - size - fits - all general policy to all countries . 
sometimes sanctions are applied ; sometimes constructive engagement . 
there may be different strategies for different countries . 
i am of the opinion that the Senate needs a forum to explore these issues . 
perhaps the Foreign Affairs Committee is the relevant forum in which to explore these issues , rather than the Banking Committee . 
they must be explored , either here in full debate or in committee . 
i hope the committee to which this bill is sent spends some serious time on this matter and brings it back to this chamber . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not wish to interfere with any other senator who wishes to speak on this matter , but we on the government side would like to see this bill go to committee . 
it is introduced here ; it then has to go to the House for approval . 
i suppose that would make an amendment relatively easy , in that , if it were amended with the deletion of , for instance , Uzbekistan , it is not a matter of coming back . 
the Department of Foreign Affairs has a role in these treaties , but so does the Department of Finance or Revenue Canada in terms of this being a tax treaty . 
if what has been stated in debate is correct , and I have no reason to believe it is not , why would we negotiate a tax treaty with any country that has an offensive human rights record ? 
why would we maintain a treaty arrangement with that country ? 
those questions are best answered by the officials who negotiated and entered into the treaty . 
in terms of the Senator Di Nino ' s concern as to which committee this should be referred , I have asked for some information on the practice . 
clearly , it could go to either the Banking Committee or the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
when it has completed its work , the Banking Committee may well refer this bill to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
given what I have heard today in this debate , this bill will not be pushed through committee without many important questions being asked . 
that is the place , I submit , for those questions to be put . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move that Bill S - 3 be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to point out that the last tax treaty we received , Bill S - 16 , went to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
that bill dealt with Vietnam , Croatia and Chile . 
the Foreign Affairs Committee made interesting recommendations regarding privacy , the ability of the signatory countries to implement successfully the parts of the treaty , and other recommendations . 
it would be a shame if the continuity of the report of the committee were broken by sending similar legislation to another committee . 
i would urge the deputy leader to reconsider and move that this bill go to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , in terms of precedent , two income tax conventions in the Thirty - fifth Parliament , Bill C - 105 and Bill S - 2 , were both dealt with by the Banking Committee . 
in the Second Session of the Thirty - fifth Parliament , we dealt with a tax treaty , Bill C - 37 . 
it was also referred to the Senate Banking Committee . 
other senators may have a better institutional memory than I on this subject , but to be truthful , I was told that Bill S - 16 was sent to the Foreign Affairs Committee because of the heavy workload of the Banking Committee . 
that is why I suggest that the majority of bills , with the exception of Bill S - 16 , were sent to the Banking Committee . 
honourable senators , if the Banking Committee is doing its job , it will be able to draw out any problem of the nature that honourable senators have raised in debate on Bill S - 3 . 
if necessary , committee members can make a recommendation that the bill be referred to the Foreign Affairs Committee for further study . 
i do emphasize , once again , that this is a Senate bill . 
it is not a bill received from the House of Commons . 
we have some extra flexibility in that regard . 
i see the traditional reference of tax treaties to the Banking Committee as useful in that taxation is an important aspect of this bill . 
it is the most important aspect of this bill , except that human rights becomes an issue if we do not want to deal with a country because of their human rights record . 
one country has been named and others will be mentioned as we get into debate on this topic . 
however , the proper way to deal with this matter is to address the tax considerations first and then , if necessary , deal with the matter in the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I do not think the issue of which committee the bill is referred to is that important . 
however , because the bill deals principally with bilateral relations between two countries , the Foreign Affairs Committee would be a more appropriate body to review this information . 
perhaps the Deputy Leader of the Government would agree to recommend that the committee deal with the issues that have been raised in the chamber as far as the human rights issues are concerned as well as the issues of confidentiality and privacy when sharing information with some of these states . 
in my opinion , these issues were not properly responded to the last time that we dealt with this matter . 
honourable senators in this chamber all understand the task . 
either committee could do the job and respond to the questions we have raised . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if the debate yesterday and today is to be taken seriously , then these international human rights questions must dominate our debate at second reading . 
unfortunately , the sponsor of the bill , who led off the debate on the principle of the bill , does not even bother to come to discuss the new issues and provide us direction . 
i learned about the debate over the past few days . 
i did obtain a report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs dated May 28 , 1998 . Senator Lynch - Staunton referred to it . 
the committee dealt with Bill S - 16 , a similar type of bill . 
in the sixth report of that committee , the committee members indicated that they had two specific concerns . 
first , they proposed that , in advance of the Government of Canada presenting similar legislation in the future , the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade assure the Senate that it has conducted pre - screening of signatory countries in its institutional capacity to implement successfully the provisions of the relevant agreements and conventions . 
that is a principle with which our Foreign Affairs Committee has been seized . 
that committee might very well see an opportunity to put into the bill a provision which speaks directly to compliance with human rights . 
i think that would be exciting and forward - looking . 
this is part of the thrust of our debate here at second reading . 
the Foreign Affairs Committee has seized itself with similar action on a similar treaty . 
i agree with Senator Hays on the tax part of it , because the second recommendation had to do with tax officials in the two countries having the appropriate tax data systems in place , and also with protection of privacy . 
in this case , it makes a great deal of sense to refer this particular bill to the Foreign Affairs Committee under the circumstances of the real debate that took place in this chamber . 
i would even move an amendment , if appropriate , unless Senator Hays wants to change his mind . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I would suggest that the bill go to the Banking Committee first , which could deal with the principal thrust of the treaty . 
it can then be considered by the Foreign Affairs Committee if that is the wish of the Senate . 
some valid points have been raised . 
i do not have any problem with the Foreign Affairs Committee looking at it , but it may well be that the pre - screening has been done . 
it may well be that there is a reason to include this country or some of the countries . 
senator Di Nino : 
do you want to bet a lunch ? 
senator Hays : 
i am not a wagering person . 
the bill was given second reading , and I had asked that it be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
i have no problem in amending that motion so the bill can be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , following which it be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs for further review . 
i believe I can amend my motion with leave . 
senator Kinsella : 
with leave , you can . 
senator Hays : 
i would suggest we add the rider " provided the Banking Committee makes that recommendation . " 
i would make the motion in that form . 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , I would be pleased to see the bill go to the Banking Committee provided the Deputy Leader advises them of the debate around this issue and the history that has come out of the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
then , when they look at it , they will know that these issues have been raised and can refer it to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
is there some assurance that that will be done ? 
senator Hays : 
one relies on one ' s Senate colleagues to read Hansard . 
i suppose it is possible that some do not do it as faithfully as one would hope . 
i am not sure I can give the honourable senator an undertaking that would satisfy her request . 
i undertake to do what I can to ensure that the chairman of the Banking Committee is asked to read the debate today . 
hopefully , he will read it . 
i would encourage the honourable senator to perhaps have a discussion with him . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable Senator Hays , is it your motion that we refer the bill to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce and then to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs ? 
senator Hays : 
if recommended by the Banking Committee . 
is that in order ? 
senator Kinsella : 
that part is out of order . 
it must be an order of the Senate . 
senator Hays : 
i will go along with my earlier recommendation . 
i therefore move , with leave of the Senate and pursuant to rule 30 : 
that the Bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce and to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
question of Privilege 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I have given notice of my intention to raise a question of privilege with respect to the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
as you are undoubtedly aware , honourable senators , this standing committee was authorized to consider the restructuring of Canada ' s airline industry , pursuant to the Order of Reference of October 14 , 1999 . 
pursuant to that order , the committee is to submit its report before December 15 , 1999 . With myself as Chair , the committee has held eight public hearings , during which it has heard 53 witnesses . 
last week , we interrupted our public hearings and began consideration of drafts of the report . 
we are now at the third draft . 
we have been very careful to avoid any publicity with respect to our deliberations . 
all drafts were marked " draft " and " confidential " . 
during our meeting to consider the first draft , I took care to distribute copies only to those senators present , and I collected them at the end of the meeting . 
when it came time to consider the second draft , I sent a copy to each senator on the committee the day before we met . 
this time , unlike the previous meeting , I did not retrieve copies of the second draft of our report , trusting to the honesty of senators and their assistants and wanting to give them more time to consider the report ' s contents . 
yesterday evening , just hours after the committee met , I learned that a Canadian Press journalist had a copy of the second draft of our report in his possession . 
in its morning edition , Le Soleil , a Quebec City newspaper , has published an article by this same CP journalist in which one may read the following : 
in a report to be tabled in the Senate tomorrow , members of the Upper Chamber , both Liberal and Conservative , have reached agreement to authorize American air carriers to service various Canadian destinations ... 
referring to the Transport and Communications Committee , the journalist goes on : 
as for The Toronto Star , it also published an article today which read as follows : 
the Senate committee , close to completing its report , is expected to propose raising the single investor limit in Air Canada stock to 33.3 per cent from 10 per cent , and the foreign ownership limit to 49 per cent from 25 per cent , sources said . 
i am prepared , if required , to table a copy of the Quorum reproducing the two articles . 
honourable senators , this leak adversely affects the work presently underway in the Transport and Communications Committee . 
although the information given in the media today is based on a draft report that has not been finalized , it may well colour the perception the public will have of our final report . 
as I have said , our report is not finished . 
there are still a number of points to be discussed . 
unfortunately , the leak , and the reactions there will be to it , might hinder serene and informed reflection by the committee members . 
above and beyond the damage to the committee of which I have the honour to chair , a leak like this is prejudicial to the work of all Senate committees . 
the confidentiality of our discussions is at stake and , by that very fact , the ability of senators to freely debate the matters referred to us . 
in order to fulfil our mandate properly , we must have the certainty that the work we are doing in camera remains confidential . 
no act done at any committee should be divulged before it has been reported to the House . 
the citation also provides the following : 
the publication of proceedings of committees conducted with closed doors or of reports of committees before they are available to Members will , however , constitute a breach of privilege . 
it is surprising that such a thing should happen in the Senate , a responsible and transparent institution , which makes its activities public . 
it is therefore unacceptable for someone to have to feel the need to divulge to the media documents that will in any case be made public once final decisions have been reached . 
unfortunately , this leak combines with other similar events that have occurred recently in our institution . 
on September 14 , Senator Andreychuk raised the question of privilege , which she reintroduced on October 13 , on the subject of a leak that occurred in the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
i hope we will be able to bring things under control in time to put a stop to these incidents , which threaten the credibility of our institution . 
within the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications there has always been an atmosphere of respect and collegiality . 
i have an immense respect for the members of the committee . 
this is why I am so surprised that such a thing could occur . 
i have no idea how this leak could occur . 
i do not know if it was intentional , accidental or through negligence . 
however , there was a leak , and it constitutes in my opinion a breach of Senate privilege . 
i ask you to rule accordingly . 
i will then be able to move the following motion : 
that the matter be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders for investigation . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I support the motion which is presently before us . 
a check of our side has produced all of the reports ; therefore , we know where our copies are . 
that is not a comment on anything . 
senator Bacon has suggested that it could have been inadvertent , a deliberate leak or carelessness . 
what is important here is that the matter , with the attached level of priority that it deserves , be referred to the committee so there can be no question that propriety will be served . 
whether we get to the end of it or not is not nearly as important as the potential danger . 
among other things , we are dealing in the report with the level of individual ownership and the level of foreign ownership in Canadian Airlines . 
that could lead to speculation that would be injurious not only to the airline industry and investors themselves but , above all , to the confidence that Canadians place in the processes of this institution . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , I agree with the comments made by Senators Bacon and Forestall . 
i have the privilege of participating in the work of the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
the issue raised by Senator Bacon is , in a way , already before our committee , since Senator Andreychuk raised a similar point some time ago . 
there is a bug in the system . 
if such situations keep occurring over a short period of time , it is certainly because some people in our group - we do not know who - do not have a clear idea of their responsibilities . 
let me draw your attention to how another parliament , that is the British Parliament , deals with such issues . 
i am referring to two decisions made by the British House of Commons , which suspended for 10 days without pay a member who had released a committee report before the committee had authorized such disclosure . 
again , that member of Parliament was suspended for 10 days without pay . 
in another case that was reported , two members of Parliament were sanctioned in October by the committee of the British House of Commons : the member who asked for the report and the member who gave it . 
both were fined and suspended for reasonable periods of time . 
they also had to rise and apologize to their fellow members in the British House of Commons . 
this issue is taken extremely seriously in our parliamentary system and in our traditions . 
the reason is simple , as explained Senator Bacon , and I am quoting the British committee : 
it is at that stage that outside involvement with the conclusions of the report might be attempted . 
if there were any suspicion that such a practice existed , the standing of our whole select committee system could be questioned . 
none of our committees will be able to do its work and report in this house in a productive and responsible manner if , at the important and crucial stage of drafting reports , drafts of these reports begin floating around left , right and centre , to coin a phrase . 
it is therefore extremely important , and I am looking at my colleague Senator DeWare , who is on the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , that these matters , which were raised by both Senator Andreychuk and Senator Bacon , be considered by the committee . 
we could thus agree not only on the ethic that we would all undertake to follow but also , unfortunately , on the system of sanctions that we must perhaps implement in order to ensure that incidents of this nature do not recur . 
it is with this in mind , honourable senators , that I would like to support the remarks made by Senators Bacon and Forrestall . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to add a few words . 
it is unfortunate that we have a second example of a matter of privilege arising on almost identical facts . 
i am referring , of course , to the question of privilege before the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders raised by Senator Andreychuk . 
i should like to add that it seems fairly straightforward , based on that precedent where , in deciding whether or not there was a prima facie case of privilege , the Speaker cited Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms , 6 th Edition , page 241 , citation 877 , which states : 
no act done at any committee shall be divulged before it has been reported to the House . 
it further states : 
the publication of proceedings of committees conducted with closed doors or of reports of committees before they are available to Members will , however , constitute a breach of privilege . 
accordingly , Your Honour , it would seem fairly straightforward , and I , too , would urge your consideration of this matter as a prima facie case , making it appropriate for a reference to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders . 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , I , too , wish to speak in support of the motion of Senator Bacon . 
the culprit lies at the source and not in the publication . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I should like to add a very few words to the debate . 
we should be crystal clear on what precisely the debate is about . 
this particular debate is to persuade the Speaker that there is a prima facie case of a breach of privilege , therein for the Speaker to grant the issue priority over all other debate in the chamber . 
in support of what Senator Bacon has said , I welcome her initiative and I thank her for laying out the facts . 
in other words , the contents of draft reports should not be disclosed to the so - called media , or to the so - called public , prior to any disclosure to senators and the Senate chamber itself . 
needless to say , this issue seems to be an abiding one , a burgeoning one , and obviously one that is compelling our attention . 
i note that , on September 14 , Senator Andreychuk raised a similar question . 
i believe I spoke in that debate . 
again , on October 13 , Senator Andreychuk reintroduced the same subject matter and again I joined her with ready support . 
the real question before us , honourable senators , is whether there is a prima facie , first blush evidence of a breach of privilege . 
i would say to Her Honour that there is wide support in the chamber for such a finding . 
speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , if no other senator wishes to speak , I will give my ruling . 
i wish to thank Senator Bacon and all honourable senators who took part in the debate . 
i recall Senator Molgat being asked to rule on a similar question in September . 
i therefore accept the question of privilege raised by Senator Bacon . 
i propose that the question be referred to the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders for investigation . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lois M. Wilson rose pursuant to notice of November 17 , 1999 : 
honourable senators , from October 23 to November 5 of this year , a seven - person delegation , organized by the Canadian Council of Churches , with assistance from the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade , explored the ongoing challenges faced by Chinese partners in their expression of religious practice in China . 
representing the mainline Christian churches in Canada , the delegates drew extensively on their 100 - year institutional history with Chinese partners for this exploration of the protection of religious freedom in China . 
a possible future engagement includes an inter - faith Canadian delegation meeting inter - faith partners in China , and an engagement in Tibet . 
the delegation went in the spirit of constructive engagement , with a view to sharing insights on how laws on freedom of religion could reflect the international obligations of the two United Nations human rights covenants that China is considering ratifying . 
the delegation understood itself as one of a number bilateral engagements being undertaken between Canada and China , and complementing the needs assessment mission sent to China by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , Mary Robinson . 
that offers a comprehensive program of technical cooperation in the administration of justice , legislative reform and other areas of human rights . 
during the two - week period , the delegation visited six cities and held discussions with a wide variety of church and government personnel , including China ' s Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Director of the Religious Affairs Bureau . 
the Western press reports mainly stories of religious persecution in China , and the arbitrary arrests , detentions and human rights abuses as seen through our eyes . 
the arrests of persons on religious grounds is reported without any explanation other than " they broke the Chinese law , " and it is widely perceived by Canadians as a violation of religious freedom and of human rights . 
without a shadow of a doubt , some of those are accurate . 
that is the dark side to the life of religious communities in China . 
however , nothing is ever said of what the laws and regulations on religions say , why they were put in place and why there are penalties for breaking them . 
the constitution of the People ' s Republic of China comes out of a history of Confucianism , Marxist revolution and the need for control , stability and order in governance for a country that boasts 1.3 billion people , a history and context very different from our own . 
the delegation was never in a city that had less than 10 million people . 
the constitution guarantees the freedom of citizens to belief or non - belief , and it protects normal religious activities . 
however , it does not guarantee the freedom of religious believers to manifest or practise that belief , nor does it define " normal religious activities " , except to say that no one may use religion to engage in activities that disrupt public order . 
this grey area is responsible for some of the Chinese curtailment of religious freedom that we hear about in the West , and , because of its ambiguity , can be abused by those who administer the regulations , particularly in areas very remote from Beijing . 
the constitution also makes it clear that religious bodies are not subject to any foreign domination . 
this arises out of China ' s suspicion of the intentions of the international religious community , at whose hands its sovereignty has suffered in the past . 
with the highly privatized orientation of religious groups wanting to preach individual salvation only , in a country that highly prizes collectivity , particularly when those groups come from Los Angeles or Taiwan , they are viewed as foreign interference . 
two sets of regulations ensure that religion does not become a source of destabilization or a threat to national security . 
the regulations come out of an understanding of freedom as having to do with collective rights , whereas , in the West , the emphasis is more on individual rights . 
it is required that every centre of religious activity register with the government and meet six criteria : a place of worship , a trained leader , a certain number of believers , a governing committee , a legal source of income , and a name for a meeting place . 
it is important to note that every social group in China is required to register with the government , not only religious groups . 
this is again in keeping with the emphasis on collective rights . 
indeed , the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences commented that Christians make good Chinese citizens . 
our Protestant Church partners have fashioned the China Christian Council , a post - denominational church where older people refer to themselves as a former Presbyterian , a former Anglican , and so on . 
it is fully Chinese in its origins in the Three Self Patriotic Movement , as is its governance , its financing , and its theology . 
partners see the regulations as protection for their activities and a guarantee against interference from non - believing Chinese , such as happened during the Cultural Revolution . 
as a result of this protection , the Protestant churches in China are experiencing phenomenal growth , and their biggest problem is how to train enough able leadership to meet the demand . 
we met one young woman , for example , who , having received three months training , is now in charge of the spiritual direction of 1,000 people . 
although a minority in China , Christians in China far outnumber Christians in Canada . 
the situation for Catholics is different . 
registered Catholic churches are known as the Patriotic Church , and support government policies , such as the one - child policy . 
this has negative implications for the recruitment of priests , since few families would allow their one child to enter a system that precludes the passing down of the family name , yet , " Fully Chinese ; fully Catholic " could be their slogan . 
those who , by choice or circumstance , meet and worship in unregistered venues may do so for several reasons : believers ' allegiance to outside authorities or influence ; objection to being confined to one meeting place ; refusal of the authority of the Chinese Catholic Patriotic Association or the Chinese Christian Council ; or the acceptance of heterodox teaching and practices that could threaten public order . 
then there are the cults . 
china is well aware of cults in Canada , and at the Academy of Social Sciences , a professor asked us about the cult known as " the Toronto blessing " that operates near the Pearson airport , of which you may have heard . 
none of us had ever visited it firsthand , and so we had to rely on hearsay to respond . 
china promulgated a law on cults on the last day of our visit . 
without exception , our partners , as well as the government , viewed Falun Gong as a destabilizing and harmful , foreign - influenced organization . 
they also saw it as flourishing among the uneducated , vulnerable Chinese who may still be isolated from modernization and the benefits of modern medicine . 
our delegation took no position on the teachings of Falun Gong . 
in our meeting with Deputy Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi , I raised several concerns on behalf of Canada ' s Minister of Foreign Affairs . 
the first is that Canadians were deeply concerned about ongoing arrests , detentions , ill - treatment and abuse of Falun Gong practitioners who appeared to publicly exhibit exemplary non - violent behaviour in their ongoing demonstrations . 
because the constitution guarantees citizens the right to believe or not to believe , the perception in Canada is that the constitution is not being honoured . 
when and how will " normal religious activity " be clearly defined ? 
the second is whether the implementation of the new law on cults will be retroactive . 
the third is with respect to what guarantees the international community has that those arrested will be brought to fair and open trials . 
what implications do the two United Nations covenants , signed by China in 1997 and 1998 but not yet ratified , have on the treatment of the Falun Gong ? 
these questions , as well as many others that I do not have time to raise in this short inquiry , remain unsatisfactorily answered to date but provide an ongoing agenda for our continuing collaboration with China on religious freedom in the light of the international covenants . 
we expect that delegations and exchanges on matters of faith , religious liberty , and the implementation of religious policy , in keeping with international covenants , will continue . 
we think it a more productive approach than a confrontational one . 
we hope to receive a delegation of officials from the Religious Affairs Bureau to Canada to deepen our mutual understanding of church - state relations and to clarify for them the mystery of why Canada has no need for a religious affairs bureau . 
we also expect to receive a delegation of scholars from the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences , who , in concert with our academics , can deepen our mutual understanding of religion in secular society . 
on motion of Senator Wilson , for Senator Austin , debate adjourned . 
aboriginal Peoples 
royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples - Committee Authorized to Study Recommendations Respecting Aboriginal Governance and to Apply Papers and Evidence of Previous Session to Current Study 
hon. Charlie Watt , pursuant to notice of November 23 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report on the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples ( Sessional Paper No. 2 / 35 - 508 ) respecting Aboriginal governance and , in particular , seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on : 
2 . the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships ; and 
3 . the models of Aboriginal self - government required to respond to the needs of Aboriginal Peoples and to complement these new structural relationships ; 
that the papers and evidence received and taken on the subject and the work accomplished by the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples during the first session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 16 , 1999 , and that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until December 24 , 1999 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
motion agreed to . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) , for Senator Kirby , pursuant to notice of November 18 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I have a question on Motion No. 11 . Is that a permanent authorization , one that will allow the committee to televise all its work , as they choose to do , or for a specific purpose only ? 
senator Hays : 
my understanding , Senator Corbin , is that it is a motion whereby the Senate approves the transmittal , by electronic media , for all of the proceedings of the committee , not just with respect to a particular study , until prorogation . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government , for Senator Kirby , pursuant to notice of November 18 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
motion agreed to . 
agriculture and Forestry 
committee Authorized to Study Present State and Future of Agriculture 
hon. Fernand Robichaud , pursuant to notice of November 23 , 1999 , moved , for Senator Fairbairn : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be authorized to examine the present state and the future of agriculture in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report no later than June 29 , 2001 . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Study Present State and Future of Forestry 
hon. Fernand Robichaud , pursuant to notice of November 23 , 1999 , moved , for Senator Fairbairn : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be authorized to examine the present state and the future of forestry in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report no later than June 29 , 2001 . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel 
hon. Fernand Robichaud , pursuant to notice of November 23 , 1999 , moved , for Senator Fairbairn : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it ; and 
that the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Fernand Robichaud , pursuant to notice of November 23 , 1999 , moved , for Senator Fairbairn : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow , at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 12 
Thursday , November 25 , 1999 
the Honourable Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Speaker Pro tempore 
table of Contents 
the Honourable P . Derek Lewis , Q . C . 
tributes on Retirement 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Allan Austin Lamport , O . C . 
tributes 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
fisheries 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
security and Intelligence 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
transportation Safety and Security 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
adjournment 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Removing Troops from Troubled Areas 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Request for Copy of Statement of Requirements 
industry 
national Hockey League - Possibility of Government Aid to Teams 
delayed Answer to Oral Questions 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possibility of Program for Farm Credit - Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Efficacy of Program - Payouts to Applicants 
business of the Senate 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Debate Continued 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Study Developments Respecting Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debated Continued 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
the SENATE 
Thursday , November 25 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker pro tempore in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Honourable P . Derek Lewis , Q . C . 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. B . Alasdair Graham : 
honourable senators , when Winston Churchill published a collection of his newspaper and magazine articles under the title , Great Contemporaries of 1938 , he included a testimony to the life and work of Robert Baden - Powell , whom he called one of the three most famous generals he had known in his life . 
Baden - Powell , of course , was not only a respected general in the Armed Forces but also founder of the worldwide Boy Scout movement . 
Churchill wrote that the " Be Prepared " motto of scouting ' s famous founder " speaks to every heart its message of duty and honour . 
be prepared to stand up faithfully for right and truth , however the winds may blow . " 
honourable senators , as I look through the documents pertaining to the wonderful career of Senator Derek Lewis , Q . C . - a public life marked by a deep commitment to service and devotion to duty - I found the influence of Baron Baden - Powell very solidly in his background . 
Derek was for many years a major figure in the Boy Scouts of Canada , having served over a period of time as secretary of the national organization , and he is now an honorary life vice - president . 
senator Lewis , as all honourable senators in this chamber would know , is a very modest person . 
some might even characterize him as the Baden - Powell of Newfoundland . 
legend has it that while Senator Lewis served in the Boy Scouts , Senator Joan Cook , who is his seatmate today in this chamber , was a member of the Girl Guides in Newfoundland . 
throughout those long years of dedicated service , Senator Lewis was committed to the development of the fullest potential of young people and the creation of responsible citizens - individuals with values which always centred on doing their best , both in their communities and their country , and always with eyes wide open on the international community . 
in many ways , the motto of " Be Prepared , " which Baden - Powell himself noted was founded on his own initials and means that " you are always to be in a state of readiness in mind and body to do your duty , " has been a hallmark of this distinguished senator who I have always been so proud for so many years to call a true friend . 
senator Lewis was admitted to the Newfoundland bar in 1947 , only two years before this small , but significant nation in its own right - only two years before the tenth province - joined the Canadian Confederation . 
this year , as we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the union , unfortunately we are saying goodbye to one of Newfoundland ' s outstanding sons and gentlemen - a man who represents all the talent of a warm - hearted , resilient and dynamic people , the people of Newfoundland , in the political life of this country . 
a native of St. John ' s and a highly respected lawyer , Senator Lewis brought his renowned sense of humour and his great skills at negotiation and compromise - building to the Senate of Canada upon his appointment in March of 1978 . 
when I first met Senator Lewis , as so many of us made our first acquaintances , namely , through politics , Derek was Newfoundland chair or senior advisor in many federal election campaigns . 
senator Lewis ' dedication and reliability are well known in this place . 
he has served on virtually every committee the Senate has struck and in so doing was widely renowned for his ability to work unfailingly with other committee members to come to consensus on often complex pieces of legislation . 
the litany is extensive , it is impressive , and it is important for the record . 
for three years , between 1984 and 1986 , he chaired the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , and he served as a member of that committee continuously from 1979 to the present . 
he has served on the Standing Committee on Rules and Orders or , as it became known after 1991 , on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , for about the same duration of time - a little over two decades . 
senator Lewis brought his very considerable political gifts to the Standing Committee on Regulations and Other Statutory Instruments . 
he chaired the Standing Joint Committee on the Scrutiny of Regulations over much of the course of this decade . 
he often served on the Joint Committee of Printing of Parliament and the Special Joint Committee on the Reform of the Senate struck in the early 1980 s . 
senator Lewis has , in addition to this already long and impressive list , served on the Special Joint Committee on the 1987 Constitutional Accord and the Special Committee on Bill C - 110 ( constitutional amendments ) from 1994 to 1996 . 
it is no wonder , then , that this joyful Newfoundlander , with the quick wit and ready laugh , has acquired one of the finest reputations of any person ever to serve in this chamber . 
he is a man renowned for his generosity of time and spirit and energy in the service of his province and country . 
as a senator , he has always understood that the Senate of Canada , as I repeat over and over , is the workplace of government - a workshop wherein he acquired universal respect and admiration on both sides of this chamber . 
for Derek Lewis , who gave so much of his volunteer time to scouting in this country , the road to success was always just a matter of doing one ' s duty and of paddling one ' s own canoe - as Baden - Powell once said - with heart and head , and to be prepared , as Senator Lewis has always been , to stand up faithfully for right and for truth , however the winds may blow . 
right and truth . 
duty and honour . 
fairness and equity . 
these words aptly apply to our departing colleague . 
i also recognize the very supportive role played by Senator Lewis ' wife , the amazing Grace , who is with us in the gallery today . 
many of us in this chamber have been the beneficiaries of their friendship and their warm and very generous hospitality over a long , long period of time . 
they leave this place with the best wishes of all honourable senators and with our very sincere wishes for good health and much happiness together in the years ahead . 
hon. C . William Doody : 
honourable senators , I should like to add a few words of good wishes to those of my colleagues on the occasion of the retirement from this place of our friend Derek Lewis . 
i have known Senator Lewis here in this place for 20 years and before that back in St. John ' s . 
he is truly a very unusual man . 
i can honestly say that during all that period of time , I have yet to hear anyone utter an unkind or critical word about him . 
that is made even more remarkable by the fact that he has been a successful practising lawyer during all that period of time . 
to make it even more remarkable , in addition to his very successful law practice during that period , he was and is very active in the affairs of the Liberal Party of Canada . 
i cannot recall an election , federal or provincial , in which Derek did not take an active part . He was a player in numerous campaigns , winning some and losing some . 
win or lose , Derek was always a gentleman : polite , well mannered , well turned out and meticulous to the extreme . 
in point of fact , I have heard it said in St. John ' s that Derek ' s most embarrassing moment was being caught one day with his necktie loosened . 
no matter what the occasion , no matter winning or losing or any other way , all of his activities were always seasoned with a nice touch of a sardonic gentle humour that I think was unique to Derek Lewis . 
in the Senate , I think he will be best remembered for his work on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
senator Graham has itemized quite properly and well the vast role of activities in which Derek participated in this place . 
he has been invaluable in the work of the Legal Affairs Committee , and his wide knowledge of the law and his practical common - sense approach to committee work and the tasks assigned to him will be difficult to replace . 
senator Lewis ' attendance record in this place , of course , is something of which we can all be proud and that all of us should try to emulate . 
i did not see any reference to it in Claire Hoy ' s book , but I do not expect that sort of thing gets much attention anyway . 
i served with Derek on the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration for quite a long period of time , and once again his work in that committee will be remembered , certainly by me . 
Derek ' s work in Newfoundland in his chosen profession has been done with equal dedication and meticulous care . 
his career as a lawyer has long been recognized by his peers . 
he was a bencher of the Law Society of Newfoundland from 1962 to 1978 . 
he assumed the chairmanship of the Law Foundation of Newfoundland in 1979 . 
honourable senators , Derek Lewis has pursued the practice of law in the province of Newfoundland since 1947 . 
that was shortly before the Confederation episode referred to by Senator Graham . 
i am still trying to find out if Derek was a confederate or an anti - confederate . 
he refuses to say . 
sometimes he refers to himself as a reluctant Canadian . 
he does that in the past tense , so I do not know exactly what that means . 
i am trying to find out for certain if he was or was not , because it was a very close margin there , as honourable senators will remember , and there may be grounds for a recount . 
Derek Lewis has been active in the affairs of our province and our city . 
his work with the Boy Scouts of Canada has been mentioned . 
he is well recognized in Newfoundland for that , for his work with the Game Fish Protection Society of our province , and for his work with various and sundry other volunteer organizations that are so vital to the orderly progress of society in Newfoundland . 
indeed , Derek has been active in just about everything . 
he has given generously of his time , whenever he has been asked , and we are all grateful to him . 
i will not go into any detail with respect to Senator Lewis ' work with the Liberal Party , as Senator Graham is far more capable of doing that . 
besides , it would not sound very complimentary from my point of view . 
i wish Derek and Grace many happy years of retirement . 
in that , I include the hope that he retires from the Liberal Party , as well as the Senate , for obvious reasons . 
thank you , Derek . 
hon. Joan Cook : 
honourable senators , those of us who aspire to public life believing that we can bring about change , change that will ensure a better quality of life for all people , need look no further than to my friend and colleague Senator Derek Lewis . 
he is of a quiet strength , with an extraordinary character and incredible wit . 
as Derek is ever ready to remind me , brevity is the soul of wit , so I simply say my association with him and his wife , Grace , spans some 30 turbulent political years . 
many and varied have been the challenges , highs and lows . 
were I to write a book , I can assure Senator Doody that it would ensure me a best - seller . 
during that time , Derek was the Liberal Party ' s provincial treasurer . 
candidates and campaign workers alike seeking necessary funds believed that if they had enough money , they would surely win . 
his patience , I know , is infinite because in this regard his was certainly tried . 
however , when time after time we tasted electoral defeat , Grace was always there with her comforting ginger snaps to ease our sense of loss and dejection . 
second , money does not win elections ; you will win when the people are with you . 
therefore , in the immortal words of the late Don Jamieson , when speaking of our Newfoundland heritage , that describes you both so well , I end by saying : 
Derek and Grace , may you never change , and long may your big jib draw ! 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , I am sorry to see the departure of Senator Lewis from our ranks . 
i know that we have sat on opposite sides in this chamber , but , as senators from Newfoundland , we have sat on the same side of many an airplane over the years and shared all too many flight delays and diversions . 
i did not know Senator Lewis before I came to the Senate . 
he lived on our province ' s East Coast , while I reside on the West Coast of Newfoundland , some 1,000 kilometres away . 
senator Lewis was a tremendous help to me in surviving those early months here . 
he acted as a mentor to me then and has continued over the years since to offer me wise counsel , and , I might add , without charging me a cent . 
i have never known Derek Lewis to be in a melancholy mood . 
no matter how dark or foreboding the weather or the political situation might be , Derek Lewis will always boost your spirits . 
he has an admirable ability to recall a joke at any time to suit the occasion . 
with Derek , jokes are often unexpected , and he can tell very humorous ones without even cracking a smile . 
despite the wit and the humour he displayed to his friends , Derek Lewis presented a very quiet face to the public . 
he has always been a very private individual , never looking for publicity for his actions and contributions . 
he has been admirably successful in public life as a fundraiser for his great Liberal Party , as a member of the national executive of that party , and as a faithful and dutiful contributor to the work of the Senate . 
he has served his party , his constituents in Newfoundland and Labrador , and Parliament , quietly and well for many years without seeking a spotlight to shine on his accomplishments . 
before coming to the Senate , Derek Lewis was a very prominent lawyer , practising in St. John ' s . 
he was highly respected and well regarded in his community . 
he had a partnership in his earlier days with Finton Aylward and John Crosbie . 
there they were , a staunch Liberal , partnered up with the very Conservative Finton Aylward , who would go on to become a justice in Newfoundland and Labrador , and partnered up as well with young John Crosbie , who would go on to a very distinguished career as a Conservative federal cabinet minister and now is Chancellor at Memorial University . 
who knows what Derek Lewis could have made of himself if he had only seen the light and shifted his political allegiance in his youth . 
i am sure his colleagues in his firm join us in wishing Derek well on this occasion . 
Derek and his wife , Grace , own a home on Hogans Pond , in St. John ' s . 
i know they enjoy swimming in that pond every morning during the summer . 
i hope they will continue to enjoy Hogans Pond and all the other delights of Newfoundland and Labrador for many years to come . 
god bless you , Derek ! 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , it is a sad day for the Senate when we must say farewell to a colleague such as Senator Derek Lewis who has made an enormous contribution to this place for more than 20 years . 
he has carved out a special spot in the Senate , both in terms of the work that he has done and his personal influence on individuals like myself , Senator Cochrane and so many others who have sought his advice and support in our efforts to better understand and develop our own role here . 
Newfoundlanders and most especially Senator Lewis bring to Parliament and certainly to this chamber a very different point of view and attitude than those from other provinces , a sort of briny freshness from their history as the newest province to enter our Confederation , at 10 minutes to midnight on March 31 , 1949 . 
we have learned from our Newfoundland colleagues a great deal . 
we have listened to them reflect on the pros and cons of their new nationhood . 
i have certainly profited from the intensity of the patriotism they give to Canada without relinquishing one ounce of the emotion and pride that belongs to their island home . 
Derek Lewis is not a great talker ; he is a doer . 
he listens and he evaluates . 
when he finally speaks up , whether it is in this chamber or on the multitude of committees on which he has served , he does so with care , wisdom and an economy of words . 
i have noticed also over the years that he will not let go . 
he is a little like a terrier with a bone if he feels a witness or a colleague is holding back or evading an issue . 
he was a model for me for years on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
when large and difficult issues loomed in this chamber on the constitutional question of changes to the Newfoundland school system , his advice to me was invaluable . 
senator Lewis is a lawyer who was described by none other than his fellow Newfoundlander John Crosbie as " a quiet but great legal mind . " 
he is not reluctant to use it , either . 
he was hardly dry behind the ears as a senator before he was trying to change this place as a member of the Special Joint Committee on the Reform of the Senate , chaired by our present Speaker Senator Molgat , in 1983 . 
senator Lewis also turned a previously dry and , some would say , incomprehensible joint Scrutiny of Regulations Committee into an art form , causing consternation in certain circles from individuals who had been lulled into a false sense of security that no one was really paying any attention . 
as others have noted , Senator Lewis has taken on just about every significant committee in the Senate , and has most recently been a key member of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
however , with all of his experience and his tremendous sense of duty to his responsibilities here , it is the kindness , the generosity , the deep sense of fairness , and the compassion for individuals less fortunate than ourselves that will remain fixed in my recollections of friendship with Senator Lewis . 
while enthusiastically seizing the opportunity for public service , he has never forgotten where he came from nor the needs and the strengths of the people of his beloved Newfoundland , where he is so admired . 
indeed , within my own Liberal Party , one simply did not set foot in St. John ' s without giving Derek a call . 
regardless of his work , or the weather , he would make time for a visit . 
i have painted a rather saintly portrait of my dear colleague , but I should note also that he has a devilish sense of humour , is a great storyteller , and has been known to relish a few sips of light rum . 
he has said that the person who will be most happy with his retirement is his wife , Grace , who has so strongly supported him , even as he set out on a new career that would take him away from the Island regularly , week after week , over these past two decades . 
that says much about the strength of their relationship . 
i wish them both many happy years together . 
Derek is not sure which new challenges he will take on , but I would encourage him not to forget to stick to his knitting . 
honourable senators , Senator Lewis was born in Newfoundland in 1924 . 
he attended Memorial University in St. John ' s , studied law , and was admitted to the bar of that province in 1947 . 
he practised law in St. John ' s with the firm of Lewis , Day , Cook and Sheppard . 
he married Grace Knight in 1961 . 
he was appointed Queen ' s Counsel in 1964 and was a bencher of the Law Society of Newfoundland from 1962 to 1978 . 
he was appointed to the Senate in 1978 . 
senator Lewis is a lawyer in private practice . 
this fact has marked his life . 
since his arrival in the Senate , he has long been a very active member of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , where he earned an excellent reputation . 
senator Lewis chaired the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs from 1984 to 1986 , co - chaired the Joint Committee on the Scrutiny of Regulations from 1994 to 1997 , and was a member of that committee for many years . 
he also served on an impressive number of other committees : the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders ; the Committee of Selection ; the Special Joint Committee on the Reform of the Senate , from 1980 to 1983 ; the Special Joint Committee of the Senate and of the House of Commons on the 1987 Constitutional Accord , in 1987 and 1988 , among other committees . 
it has been said that the great contribution of the Senate is its work related to the improvement of legislation and its work in committees . 
senator Lewis is a committee man and a great expert in legislation . 
i wish to thank him very much . 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , let me share a few more stories with you about the Honourable Senator Derek Lewis , starting with the day that I think we became friends . 
it was like a tale out of Edgar Allan Poe : " Once upon a midnight dreary , as I pondered weak and weary ... " 
of course , it really was not quite that late , but I was alone in my office on the mezzanine floor of the Senate about four months after I was called to this place , and I was getting a bit fed up with it . 
that night , I heard a little tap at the office door . 
it was Senator Lewis and Senator Bonnell . 
Derek said , " We thought you might still be here and we wondered if you would like to join us for Chinese . " 
well , I had my coat on and I was out the door almost before he finished his sentence . 
since that day , Ross and I have become true friends , I think , with both Derek and the " amazing Grace . " 
actually , we have seen far too little of Grace over the years , for she is great fun . 
i have enjoyed every minute that we have spent together . 
he was always there , and usually on time . 
he stayed until the bitter end of every meeting . 
whenever the questioning of a witness began to falter , he would come up with a question that revived the proceedings or opened up an entirely new facet of the bill that we were studying , or perhaps a possible unforeseen result of that bill . 
every committee chair knows how vitally important it is to have the right motion made at precisely the right time , and Derek could always be relied upon to do just that . 
his sense of timing has always been absolutely brilliant , and his advice on the committee ' s proceedings was always completely reliable , for , as others have said , his legal mind is impeccable . 
of course , Derek , like all Newfoundlanders over the ageof 50 , is Johnny - come - lately to the business of being Canadian . 
Derek was indeed a most reluctant Canadian . 
he voted at least once , I believe , against joining Confederation . 
in fact , he thought it was just a terrible idea . 
however , once Canada joined Newfoundland , he took to our politics with some enthusiasm - at times perhaps with a bit too much enthusiasm . 
Derek , I do hope that you will write a book . 
do not leave it to Senator Cook . 
tell the world of your escapades - tales like the one about taking out the garbage right under the nose of your old law partner ' s cohorts , and tales about what might be stored in the office safe . 
of course , that was back in the bad old days when Derek ' s law partner was a certain John Crosbie , a sometime Liberal who went on to fame , or perhaps infamy , in the other place . 
i hasten to add that Derek has become much more proper since those days , or so he says . 
Derek , my friend , the number of people in this chamber today who have said that they will miss you is a measure of the kind of person you are . 
i know that I will miss you dreadfully . 
i will miss your staunch advice , your reliable presence , and your marvellous , quirky sense of humour . 
most of all , I think , I will miss the comforting knowledge that a true friend is walking these halls every day . 
i promise that we will stay in touch and we will remain friends , even if it has to be at a distance . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak of another element of Senator Lewis ' contribution to Canada and Canadians , of which most of you may not be aware . 
you may have noticed from time to time when we see each other that we shake hands with our left hands . 
that is not a sign of membership in a secret society ; it is a sign of membership in a wonderful society that has done a great deal of work in this country . 
senator Lewis has been a long - time , dedicated and hard - working member of the scouting community , a passion we both share . 
he has been rewarded in numerous ways by that community , in particular latterly as honorary vice - president of the national body , a title I was also honoured to receive . 
may you have many years of long and happy life left . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators : 
those words , written by Rudyard Kipling , were obviously not written in knowledge of Derek Lewis , but it must have been someone very much like Derek Lewis . 
honourable senators , we refer to each other in this chamber as honourable colleagues , but I must say that none is more honourable than the Honourable Derek Lewis . 
Derek Lewis was then , and is now , a very gentle man . 
he is clearly of the view that his successes - as he has had a great many of them - could and would be achieved only through his own work and effort . 
senator Lewis has never felt the need to use other people in order to achieve his personal goals . 
no one has ever been able to claim that Derek climbed over them in his search for success , because Derek believed that it was in helping others that his own life could be enriched . 
although a successful lawyer and parliamentarian , my own view of Derek will always be of a kind man , with a gentle sense of humour , who was always very supportive of me in a quiet but clear manner . 
when I was the chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs and Senator Nolin was my deputy chair , Senator Lewis was the other member of the steering committee . 
when I became Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate , I knew he was always there , willing to lend a helping hand in his quiet but very determined way . 
Derek and Grace graciously entertained all of the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs at Hogans Pond in Newfoundland when we went there to study the Newfoundland school question . 
as Derek well knew , I had problems with that amendment ; on the other hand , he was clearly supportive of the amendment . 
i must say , I was much more concerned with upsetting Derek than I was with upsetting the government . 
i will miss Derek in this chamber . 
i will miss Grace in her all - too - infrequent visits to Ottawa . 
i wish them many years of retirement together in their beloved province , and particularly at Hogans Pond . 
i hope they will keep in touch , as good friends are rare , and they are the best of friends to all they know . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , we are here today to celebrate the long and illustrious Senate career of our friend , Derek Lewis , on his retirement - the quiet , modest man from Newfoundland . 
is it not appropriate that we pause and remind ourselves of the delicate balance the Senate plays in our public life and the quiet , almost invisible principles that render our work here significant and credible ? 
when I first came to Ottawa in 1966 to work as the chief of staff to a minister , I was advised that it was essential to learn about the work of the Senate . 
i knew very little about how the Senate actually worked . 
on a sunny day in July , I sought an appointment through Torrance Wiley , an old friend and then executive assistant to the Honourable John Connolly , the powerful leader of the government in the Senate . 
i was immediately invited to see him . 
i attended in his beautifully panelled and sunlit corner office across the hall from the Senate chamber , now occupied by the current Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
almost two decades later , when I was fortunate enough to be called to the Senate , I was immediately approached by an old friend , Senator Godfrey , the father of John Godfrey of the other place . 
senator Godfrey handed me the red Senate rule book and said , " Respect the rules , and you will get respect from the Senate . " 
shortly thereafter , the outspoken Senator McElman of New Brunswick advised me that the heart of the Senate was the work of its committees . 
while most of us are partisan , he reminded me that we can shape bad government policy through the quiet , unheralded and deliberative work of Senate committees . 
" work hard at committees , " he admonished me . 
then I encountered Senator Ian Sinclair , who at that time had just recently been appointed to the Senate . 
formerly , he was the very successful chief executive of Canadian Pacific , one of the largest corporations in Canada , and a living legend in business circles . 
senator Sinclair advised that his experience in business taught him that his best work - and hence the best work done in the Senate - is the work done by senators themselves . 
he suggested that hard work in the chamber and in the committees would bring its own personal satisfaction and personal rewards . 
finally , Senator MacEachen of Nova Scotia - formerly a leader of the government in the Senate - repeatedly reminded me , and all of us on this side , that in order to maintain our own persona ' s credibility and the credibility of the Senate , we must maintain at all times a respectful arm ' s length distance from the other place down the hall and from the other place across the street . 
echoes of his advice reverberated in the Senate just yesterday , when Senator Murray raised the question of pre - study . 
senator MacEachen was staunchly opposed to pre - study of government bills , as it had the undesirable effect of diminishing the credibility of the Senate as a chamber of sober second thought , as a chamber independent of the other place and of the other side of the street , independent in the eyes of ourselves and the public we serve . 
hence , honourable senators , for me there has been a delicate balance of principles at work in the Senate . 
the torch of power in the other place is always alluring , but if we get too close , the Senate and our work here can be burnt and turned quickly to embers and ashes . 
these were the first principles I garnered about the Senate . 
principles and practice march best when they march together . 
all of this , honourable senators , is by way of preamble to my tribute to our good friend Derek Lewis , who leaves us for a well - earned retirement . 
for me , Derek brought all of these principles alive . 
Derek respected this institution . 
Derek gained an encyclopedic knowledge of the rules and respected the practices of this place . 
he was the ultimate draftsman when it came to committee work . 
Derek was quiet , careful , competent , witty and deliberative . 
he always retained a respectful arm ' s length from the powers that be . 
in a phrase , Derek was a senator ' s senator , a public solicitor ' s solicitor . 
in that sense , he is a diminishing resource here in the Senate . 
for these reasons and for the loss of the pleasure of his company , his departure will leave the Senate sorely depleted . 
Derek , your race is run . 
your duty is done . 
you and Grace are heartily entitled to a good and healthy retirement . 
as they say in the Jewish tradition , " May you live in good health to 120 years . " 
god bless . 
hon. Landon Pearson : 
honourable senators , when I first joined the Senate , Derek Lewis ' face was one of the very first to emerge out of the unknown crowd of faces that confronted me every day in this chamber . 
his manner was friendly yet modest . 
his perceptive good humour would constantly direct me toward what did and did not matter in this house . 
i greatly value the five years I have shared with Derek in this place and the knowledge that he has passed on to me in his inimitable style . 
i also value the fact that he regularly conveyed to me that he respected me both as a colleague and as a woman . 
Derek Lewis will be greatly missed , and I join all honourable senators here today in wishing him and Grace Godspeed . 
may their life after the Senate be considerably richer and more entertaining then they can possibly imagine now . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to stand with my colleagues and pay tribute to Senator Derek Lewis . 
i first met Senator Lewis here , not in my role as a senator but as the son of a senator . 
senator Lewis was a good and close friend of my father , who was serving in the Senate at the time . 
senator Lewis was introduced to me as a very special person . 
one of the real treats of my service here has been that I , too , have gained and enjoyed the friendship of Senator Lewis . 
we have heard already that Senator Lewis is a remarkable man , a senator , a lawyer , one of Her Majesty ' s counsel , learned in the law and , perhaps most important , a volunteer in his community . 
i congratulate him on that and I thank him for it . 
senator Lewis has represented the best of the Senate in his quiet dignity , profound competence and hard work . 
he knows what is required to make this place work . 
it is not only Senator Lewis who retires today , however . 
we must also think about the contribution of Grace . 
she has our thanks for her tolerance of Derek ' s many absences . 
we also thank Senator Lewis ' long - time assistant , Sallie . 
senator Lewis , enjoy your retirement . 
you have worked hard . 
the Senate will miss you . 
may you have a long and happy retirement . 
we hope to see you and Grace often . 
in a quiet , firm and effective way , you have served your province and your country with distinction . 
you will be missed in this place . 
hon. Edward M. Lawson : 
honourable senators , many things have been said about the outstanding career and the accomplishments of Senator Lewis , but for people who come from the West , it is always a remarkable thing to meet someone with the wonderful wit and sense of humour of Senator Lewis . 
we both have been here for a long time , but when we arrived , there was an older senator here who had been around for many years . 
this old senator would often say that when he would die , he intended to take everything with him , and he was serious . 
he came from that part of world . 
he gave them each an envelope containing $ 100,000 cash and told them that when he passed on they were each to drop the envelope into the box containing his remains . 
the old senator passed on . 
the three men all dutifully marched forward and dropped their envelopes into the coffin . 
as they were walking away , the doctor said that he had a confession to make . 
he felt the needs at the hospital were so desperate , with government cutbacks and so on , that he withheld $ 25,000 in cash . 
the minister responded that he , too , had a confession . 
given the demands and stresses and desperate needs in the church , he had held back $ 40,000 of the cash . 
senator Lewis told them that they should both be ashamed of themselves for breaking their solemn , sacred promises and assured them that he had faithfully placed in the casket his envelope containing his personal cheque for the whole $ 100,000 . 
no matter what problems you bring to this place , though you may have the weight of the world on your shoulders , when you meet Senator Lewis , you must smile . 
he is a joy to be around with his own quiet way , his wonderful wit and his wicked sense of humour . 
senator Lewis , we shall miss you ! 
hon. L é once Mercier : 
honourable senators , it is my pleasure to pay tribute to Senator Derek Lewis , who distinguished himself through his sense of justice and his sense of diplomacy . 
i have greatly appreciated this Newfoundlander ' s qualities . 
senator Lewis carried out his duties with honesty and ability . 
his intelligence and sense of humour helped strike a balance among his fellow senators . 
this is a rare skill ! 
senator Lewis often embodies the saying , " To your own self be true , " letting us all know that he is a man whose word is gold , who is dependable and trustworthy . 
i only hope that all Newfoundlanders are the same , for Senator Lewis has set an incredible standard that will be hard to follow . 
senator Lewis , you have done both your province and your country proud with your service . 
i wish you all the very best . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis : 
honourable senators , I thank the previous speakers for their comments . 
even if some of it was greatly exaggerated , I , of course , will not dispute a word of it , particularly the kind things that have been said . 
i will leave the disputing to others . 
i have had the privilege to be a member of this chamber for just over 21 years . 
i have greatly enjoyed and been honoured by the opportunity to associate with so many diverse , knowledgeable and accomplished colleagues . 
during my time here , I have made many close friendships that I will always cherish . 
i must say , I certainly enjoyed working with members on both sides of the chamber . 
my only regret is that , due to circumstances , I have in the past year been somewhat restricted in my activities and have not had the opportunity to get to know a little better the more recent appointees to the chamber . 
at one time , I had no use or regard for the political process or for politicians . 
however , after becoming involved in politics myself , I quickly came to understand , appreciate and sympathize with those involved for their work , tribulations and uncertainties . 
it was curiosity that first led me to get involved in politics . 
as some of you may know , once you get involved in a project , you find yourself on a treadmill that goes faster and faster until you are hooked . 
some of those activities were so unpredictable that they could at times be personally confusing . 
to me , there is a need for all new senators to have available an orientation program to make them aware not only of the procedure but also of the various services and facilities available . 
in many instances , this knowledge was only gained by me through discussion with colleagues , similar to that which my colleague Senator Cook has found . 
this is a pity , as such information is readily available if one knows where to seek it . 
over the years , many new senators have expressed similar concerns . 
i understand that in the last few years steps have been taken to improve this situation . 
it is certainly important that , as soon as possible , new senators become familiar with the Rules of the Senate . 
i have greatly enjoyed , and endured , many years of work on various committees . 
i have been impressed with the depth and quality of investigations carried out therein . 
certainly , as others have said , the work of committees is one of the most important activities of the Senate . 
two committees on which I served come to mind . 
one of my first committees was the Joint Committee on Scrutiny of Regulations . 
it had a different name then . 
it was a pleasure to work with the staff and officials of the committee . 
they do such an excellent job in the tedious work of investigating and analyzing regulations and orders . 
on this committee , I served with various joint chairmen who , on the Senate side , included former senators Lafond , Forsey , Godfrey and Nurgitz , and of course the present Senator Grimard . 
more recently , our chairperson has been Senator Hervieux - Payette . 
i myself served for a while as the joint chairman of the committee . 
i also had a very long tenure on the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , which has always been one of the busiest Senate committees . 
i had the pleasure of serving with such various chairpersons as former senators Stanbury , Neiman and Nurgitz and present Senators Beaudoin , Carstairs and Milne . 
the work of this committee was most interesting and important . 
the leadership exercised by these chairpersons contributed in no small way to the accomplishments of the committee . 
i should now like to say a few words with regard to the question of reform of the Senate , which ever since its establishment has been a topic of much ongoing debate and controversy . 
i note that soon after being appointed here , the question of reform to make the Senate an elected body again came under discussion . 
in 1980 , a joint committee of both Houses of Parliament was established to consider ways by which the Senate could be reformed to strengthen its role in representing people from all regions . 
i was appointed to that committee under the joint chairmanship of the Honourable Senator Molgat and the Honourable Paul Cosgrove . 
after many meetings in various parts of the country and hearing much evidence , submissions , and discussion , the committee came to the conclusion and reported to both Houses that the Senate should be elected by the people , and it set out suggestions as to how this could be achieved . 
that report was tabled in 1984 . 
as honourable senators know , nothing has changed since . 
i recommend that senators read that report . 
you will note that the consideration of the committee was only on the question of whether the Senate should be an appointed or an elected body . 
the questions of whether Canada should actually have a bicameral form of government and what the powers and duties of such a second chamber should be were not before the committee . 
these questions have , over the years , been largely ignored . 
to my mind , these are crucial questions that should first be addressed before settling on the method of selection of members to any such second chamber or the division of membership by region or province . 
in this respect , I note that Senator Joyal is presently in the process of forming an informal committee of prominent academics to study these matters . 
for his efforts , Senator Joyal has been described in the press as the Sir Galahad of the Senate . 
we can look forward to the results of this study and any recommendations that may be made . 
before I close , I should like to thank all of you who have in any way assisted me in my work here over the years . 
i thank all staff and officials for the kindness and help they have shown me . 
in particular , I thank my secretary , Sallie DeLaplante , who is in the gallery , for her loyalty , assistance and efficiency over such a long period . 
of course , I must thank my wife , Grace , for the ongoing and loving support she gave me during this time . 
i should mention one other thing . 
i do not do so as a point of privilege . 
it appears that there is a prankster in the chamber . 
just a little while ago , I guess out of deference to my age and for my comfort , there appeared under my desk a blanket . 
i know not from where it came . 
senator Di Nino : 
it is probably from Grace ! 
senator Lewis : 
it might have been , but I will leave it here for the next occupant of this desk . 
thank you all for your forbearance , and I wish you all the very best in the future . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
the Late Allan Austin Lamport , O . C . 
tributes 
hon. Francis William Mahovlich : 
honourable senators , the former mayor of Toronto , Allan Austin Lamport , has passed away . 
Alan Austin Lamport , Order of Canada , Member of the Ontario Legislature , Chairman of the Toronto Transit Commission , member of the Royal Canadian Air Force , was known as " Lampy " to most of his friends . 
i came to know Lampy in the early 1950 s when I first arrived in Toronto . 
the year was 1953 - 54 , the subway was open , and Lampy was mayor . 
this was a blessing for anyone who had to work at Maple Leaf Gardens . 
time was of the essence , and hockey practices after school did not leave one with much time for dinner or studies . 
the subway saved time . 
the mayor was famous for his malapropisms or " Berra - isms " . 
before the U.S. had Yogi Berra , Canada had Allan Lamport . 
here are some of them : 
Lampy found his " Lampy - isms " a formidable weapon in his political career . 
the man who " denied all allegations and defied the alligators " had some losses : the Red Ensign , the Royal Canadian Air Force , a lawsuit over slander by a taxi driver and his St. David ' s seat to William Dennison when he was transferred to the East Coast in 1945 . 
i think 1945 was the year Senator Milne was born , and she happens to be the daughter of William Dennison . 
well , 40 years after he opened the subway and I arrived on the scene in Toronto , we were both named to the Order of Canada in 1994 . 
the one thing that I could predict about Lampy was where he sat at the Hot Stove Lounge at Maple Leaf Gardens . 
i would come in the entrance door , hang my coat and hat , make a right turn , and there was Lampy , a true politician , shaking everyone ' s hand as they came in for the luncheon . 
these are some more quotable quotes from the man who gave Toronto Sunday sports . 
now for your final conclusion , Lampy , you will always be remembered as the man with the " turmoil touch " . 
god bless ! 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , I saw Senator Mahovlich on Sunday evening at the funeral parlour where Allan Lamport was lying . 
i should like to associate myself with his remarks for personal reasons . 
my father , Alan Stollery , was a great supporter of Allan Lamport . 
i remember in my youth the events like Sunday sports , like the first public housing project in Canada , and all of the other things that made Allan Lamport , without a doubt , the greatest mayor of the century in Toronto . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
fisheries 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
security and Intelligence 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , on behalf of Senator Kelly , and pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Committee of the Senate on Security and Intelligence , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate ) 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration concerning the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
transportation Safety and Security 
first Report of Special Committee Tabled 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Committee on Transportation Safety and Security which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday next , November 30 , 1999 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , November 30 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to sit on December 1 , 1999 , at 3:30 in the afternoon , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( a ) , I move : 
that the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders have power to sit at 4:30 p.m. on Tuesdays , even though the Senate may then be sitting , from now until the end of December 1999 , in order for the committee to deal expeditiously with the question of privilege raised by the Honourable Senator Bacon , in addition to the questions of privilege of the Honourable Senators Andreychuk and Kinsella , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , did I hear Senator Joyal say that the motion was for 3:30 or 4:30 p.m. ? 
senator Joyal : 
i said 4:30 . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i thought the Speaker pro tempore had said 3:30 p.m. 
once again , honourable senators , we are faced with committees asking to sit while the Senate is sitting . 
perhaps the Senate should await the committees to settle their sitting hours , then we can determine our own . 
we are turning the whole thing upside down . 
four committees in two days have asked to sit while the Senate is sitting . 
i leave that with senators to reflect upon . 
they seem to be constantly intruding on the work of the Senate . 
i agree that committees take senators away to important assignments , but we have important assignments in this chamber as well . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Lynch - Staunton , the Leader of the Opposition , has raised a valid point . 
it is something that we senators , together , must reflect upon and , as Senator Lynch - Staunton suggests , come to some sort of decision on the times alloted to committees for meeting that will not interfere unduly with the work of the chamber . 
when I sat at the back of the chamber , I did not feel that way so much as I do now , as I see the chamber emptying as the afternoon wears on . 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
perhaps we could revisit that issue at the same time that we are visiting the question of committees sitting when the Senate is sitting . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure honourable senators to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate has given us the assurance , which we accept , that Sea King replacements for shipborne activity is a top priority of the Minister of National Defence . 
two days ago , the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of National Defence , in answer to a question in the other place , said that the decision rests with the minister and sits on his desk . 
today , the Deputy Chief of Defence Staff said that the Armed Forces signed off the statement of requirement in late June or early July . 
in other words , the minister has been sitting on this for some time now . 
what is the holdup ? 
has there been a departure from the defence white paper of 1994 which said that this was a top priority then and that its fulfilment would be achieved by the end of this decade ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
as the honourable senator points out , it appears that preliminary work has been done with respect to this decision . 
when I combine that with the assurance that I received from the minister , that this represents his top priority , I am very hopeful that a decision will be forthcoming in the very near future . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Possibility of Removing Troops from Troubled Areas 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , these are encouraging signs five years after the fact . 
the patient is not very well . 
the minister will be aware of Operation Cobra , initiated some years ago , in which the Armed Forces had to rely on the Sea Kings in the event they had to extract troops from Bosnia . 
we now have some 4,500 Canadian Armed Forces personnel serving in dangerous places around the world . 
what piece of equipment would we use to extract those people and bring them to safety were we to face such a requirement today ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Forrestall knows that senior military officials are always able to express a need for additional equipment , and there is always such a need . 
we have equipment that has been in service for a considerable period of time , and the Minister of National Defence has made it his priority to have this equipment replaced as quickly as reasonably possible . 
with respect to the Sea Kings helicopters , the honourable senator has and continues to forward his view that the replacement program has not moved ahead quickly enough . 
i cannot speak to what has happened in the past , but I am hopeful that we will be able to move forward in a reasonable time frame to replace that equipment . 
honourable senators , I am not a military strategist , but I know that there are types of equipment that have performed quite well in moving personnel and material into areas of our responsibility around the world . 
it is to be hoped that that capacity , which has been used recently , remains at the ready . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my concern is for the well - being of Canadian Armed Forces personnel . 
they are flying in equipment which , when serviceable , is serviceable for only a short period of time . 
the equipment is old and unreliable . 
we had the phenomenon of having to evacuate a school in Cape Breton as recently as yesterday or the day before because a Hercules aircraft developed an engine leak and had to make a precautionary landing , at best , and probably an emergency landing . 
we know that the Hercules are overdue . 
we are paying $ 10 million just to sit at the table to know what is going on . 
presumably , that is so we can replace the F - 18 s . 
if we can spend $ 140 million here and $ 147 million there , why not buy a position to be in on the design of the Cormorant or Sikorsky run of new equipment to ensure that they are outfitted with the task requirements set forth by the statement of requirement , which requirements have been available since we started looking at the EH - 101 ? 
why can we not purchase that new equipment and put it to work ? 
honourable senators , people are beginning to believe that the actions of the government are amoral , and soon they will be immoral . 
please act before we lose any more lives . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I share the concerns of the honourable senator , as I am sure do all members of the Senate , with respect to the safety of our Armed Forces and their operational efficiency . 
we are talking about complex equipment , and even complex equipment breaks down . 
in fact , even new complex equipment breaks down and requires servicing . 
i think it is fair to say that the replacement program has already made some significant strides . 
the program for the replacement of submarines has received funding of over three - quarters of a billion dollars . 
replacing one Labrador search and rescue helicopter is worth almost $ 800 million . 
these programs are underway . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Request for Copy of Statement of Requirements 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
would the minister undertake to table here in the chamber the statement of requirement with regard to the program that is now completed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will inquire of the minister and follow the existing practice of tabling such a document . 
industry 
national Hockey League - Possibility of Government Aid to Teams 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , my question is addressed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
this week , Kanata City Council announced that it would be reducing its property tax on the Corel Centre by 75 per cent . 
they would then give that property tax rebate to the Ottawa Senators . 
is it the government ' s intention to provide financial aid from the federal treasury to the Senators hockey team ? 
will such aid be distributed equally to all Canadian hockey teams ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Minister Manley , who is the minister responsible for such matters , has indicated that he has been considering options concerning federal assistance . 
obviously , this latest measure was welcome news in the process . 
it represents a measure which , perhaps , is encouraging in the overall picture . 
however , Minister Manley has indicated that while this may be a positive start , a series of elements must be in place before a decision is made by the federal government . 
to this date , I am not aware that any decision has been made by the minister . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , what are the major objections to giving federal government aid to professional hockey teams ? 
senator Boudreau : 
far be it from me to paraphrase objections that have been raised in debate by various parties , honourable senators . 
they have done that reasonably well . 
however , I can speculate that there is a resistance because of the salary levels of the players , not to mention the salary levels of the owners of the teams . 
i do not want to advance those arguments . 
i am speculating on what some objections may have been . 
the government , through Mr. Manley , has clearly said that this is a matter that he would consider , but that it had to involve a chain of events . 
the most recent event by Kanata City Council has been a positive development . 
as far as I am able to inform the honourable senator , the minister is not prepared to yet announce a decision . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I am fairly consistent . 
i do not like subsidies of any kind . 
however , I thought the federal government would be falling all over itself to give money to the Ottawa Senators because giving money to people who make lots of money is not unusual for the federal Liberals . 
for example , last year , the CBC received $ 844 million . 
the year before it received $ 903 million . 
i believe the president and the vice - president of the CBC take home salaries of between $ 200,000 to $ 300,000 per year . 
book publishers received $ 31,643,742 last year . 
the president and chairman of the board of Rogers Cable make well over $ 1 million per year , but they are not Prairie boys who play in uniforms and who are watched by 2 million people every Saturday night . 
there are all kinds of examples in the blue book which pertains to the Estimates . 
there is money for movie producers and television networks . 
there is money for movies no one goes to see , the producers and directors of which take home salaries of $ 50,000 to $ 200,000 per movie , let alone per year . 
is Mr. Manley thinking even for a moment that he will not help hockey teams and players from small Prairie towns and rural Ontario ? 
this government should be ashamed of itself . 
culturally , hockey is much more important to Canada than all of the examples to which I have referred . 
you should be writing those cheques tomorrow . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am glad to see that the honourable senator has such strong feelings on the issue . 
i certainly will convey his strong feelings to those concerned . 
for a moment I was afraid that the honourable senator was about to adopt the NDP philosophy which favours giving economic development money to people who lose money rather than to people who make money . 
senator Tkachuk : 
that is the Liberal philosophy ! 
senator Boudreau : 
delayed Answer to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to questions raised in the Senate on November 16 , 1999 by the Honourable Senators Gustafson , Sparrow and Spivak . 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possibility of Program for Farm Credit - Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance - Efficacy of Program - Payouts to Applicants 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Leonard J . Gustafson , Hon. Herbert O . Sparrow and Hon. Mira Spivak on November 16 , 1999 ) 
farm Crisis in Manitoba and Saskatchewan - Possibility of Program for Farm Credit 
farm Credit Corporation ( FCC ) realizes the seriousness of the situation that many prairie farmers face . 
in response , the Corporation has implemented a program to proactively contact customers in Saskatchewan and Manitoba who are anticipating difficulty to help them work out solutions . 
so far FCC customers are managing to make payments despite the commodity downturn . 
as of the end of October , 95 per cent of accounts were up to date nationally and 94 per cent in Saskatchewan . 
arrears levels also have not yet shown a large increase although they are rising . 
in Saskatchewan at the end of October , there were 1,267 customers in arrears compared to 953 at the same time last year . 
in Manitoba , there were 243 customers in arrears compared to 231 the same time last year . However , 
there is a lag time between the marketplace effects and arrears levels so FCC will continue to monitor the situation closely in the coming year . 
at this point , working with customers who anticipate difficulty on an individual basis is the most effective way for FCC to help these customers develop solutions to see them through . As 
a federal Crown , FCC will be ready to play a public policy role if asked . 
as mentioned , the majority of FCC customers have been able to make their payments to date . 
agricultural Income Disaster Assistance ( AIDA ) 
and just recently , the federal government added a further $ 170 million contribution , bringing total Government of Canada assistance to over $ 1 billion . 
the Government of Canada has recently made changes to both the AIDA and NISA programs that allow more producers to qualify for assistance . 
here are some key changes : 
as of September , producers have been able to apply for a 1999 AIDA Interim payment that would provide immediate assistance at 60 per cent of their total 1999 eligible payments . 
on November 4 , 1999 , the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food announced the federal government would cover 70 per cent of producers ' negative margins for 1998 and 1999 . 
for the 1999 Calendar Year , producers will be able to make a one - time choice of the reference period on which payments are based . 
since September , farming corporations that have completed their fiscal year for income tax purposes can apply immediately for 1999 AIDA benefits . 
changes to NISA have also helped put money in producers ' pockets : 
the NISA Minimum Income Trigger has been increased from $ 10,000 to $ 20,000 for an individual , and from $ 20,000 to $ 35,000 for farm families . 
participants in NISA can now make a withdrawal and deposit in the same year . 
the repayment period for interim withdrawals has been extended from 90 days to one full year for producers who withdrew more than their eligible amount under the withdrawal triggers . 
the overpayment charge for interim withdrawals has been reduced . 
producers who have opted out of the NISA program will now be allowed to rejoin the program after only two years instead of the current three years . 
with these changes , the AIDA Administration has provided almost $ 380 million in payments to some 19,000 producers . 
in addition , just over 27,500 producers have withdrawn $ 304 million from their NISA accounts . 
these changes clearly demonstrate the Government of Canada ' s commitment to remain creative and flexible in designing programs that will assist those producers in greatest need , and will continue to make improvements to ensure as many Canadian producers as possible benefit from available assistance . 
business of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
with regard to my correction to Hansard , honourable senators , it anticipates that the bill will not be in two places at one time . 
of course , it also anticipates that reports from both of those committees will come to the Senate . 
honourable senators will have to be vigilant to ensure that , if one of the committees reports before the other , it be noted as out of order , if we attempt to deal with one of the reports before both reports are on the Order Paper for deliberation in this chamber . 
senator Kinsella : 
agreed . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , may I ask the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate if this is a precedent ? 
has this ever been done before ? 
senator Hays : 
i thank Senator Corbin for his question . 
i am afraid it is a precedent . 
i think I would have been advised by experts who serve us here if there was a precedent for this . 
i have not received such advice . 
therefore , I conclude that this is a novel practice . 
senator Corbin : 
honourable senators , my understanding is that one committee will examine certain aspects of the bill . 
that committee is empowered to report , but that report will not be discussed until the bill is sent to the other committee , which will then report , and the two reports will be debated together . 
can you tell me in what way or by whom the bill will be moved from one committee to the other , if not from this house ? 
senator Kinsella : 
by the clerk . 
senator Hays : 
the honourable senator highlights the fact that the bill can only be in one place at a time . 
the bill is now out of the Senate . 
we have referred it , with an instruction to report back , to the Banking Committee . 
the language that I have used , which was discussed here yesterday , would then see it go to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
therefore , the bill will not be in more than one place at a time . 
it has gone to the Banking Committee . 
when they have concluded their deliberations , it will go to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
perhaps the chairman will time its tabling with the tabling of the report of the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
i think this procedure will work . 
provided no attempt is made to discuss the first report to arrive before the other is here , then this should not be out of order in any way that I can determine . 
i hope that helps the honourable senator . 
senator Corbin : 
honourable senators , we are talking about a precedent that can have consequences for the future operation of this chamber . 
once you set a precedent , there is an inclination to invoke the precedent to repeat that kind of performance . 
would it not be simpler for the first committee that examines this bill to report the bill back to the Senate , at which time the Senate could make a second order to refer the bill to the other committee ? 
it seems to me that that would be the ideal way to deal with the situation . 
in that way , the bill will not be in limbo somewhere . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , in responding to the honourable senator , I must report that the precedent has been set . 
we are not doing it today , we did it yesterday . 
what we are doing today is simply clarifying what was done . 
if someone wishes to ask , that is fine ; however , as a result of my understanding with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition , I am not asking for leave to do more than I have asked , which is , as a matter of order , to clarify the record of proceedings to reflect what was distributed to you all in the blues as opposed to the language that appears in the Debates of the Senate for November 24 , which was distributed in the normal course . 
senator Corbin : 
honourable senators , I will respect the decision of the Senate , but I simply want to raise a warning flag that we should not do this sort of thing on a whim . 
we should proceed along clear - cut procedural lines . 
it seems to me that the precedent that should apply in this instance would be for the first committee to study the bill , report it back , and then for the Senate to consider another motion , refer the bill to the second committee , have the committee report back , and then discuss both reports at the same time . 
i am not comfortable with the way we have decided to do it . 
senator Hays : 
i accept the criticism , honourable senators , if that is what it is . 
i can assure honourable senators that I will be more careful in future , in terms of trying out new ways of getting bills to committee . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , the Deputy Leader of the Government has tried to clarify the situation this afternoon , but Senator Corbin , by his intervention , has indicated that we have a problem now because that first committee will be required under our rules to submit its report as soon as it is ready . 
it cannot delay until the other committee has reported . 
my recommendation would be for the committee to report as soon as the report is ready but for us to stand that report while the other committee is studying the bill . 
in that way , we would be staying within the ambit of the rules . 
however , I must also add that I think this is an extremely dangerous precedent . 
senator Hays : 
again , I accept that criticism , honourable senators . 
senator Carstairs : 
it is not criticism . 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , let me begin by saying that it is with great pleasure that I speak on second reading of Bill C - 4 , legislation governing Canada ' s participation in the great science and technology project , namely , the international space station . 
i might add , in parentheses , that the bill was not controversial in the other place . 
allow me to begin my remarks by quoting the inspiring words pronounced by John H . Chapman , the father of the Canadian space program : 
in the second century of Confederation the fabric of Canadian society will be held together by strands in space just as strongly as the railway and telegraph held together the scattered provinces in the last century . 
Mr. Chapman went on to state : 
the technological advances which are the outcome of space spill over into the more normal activities of our world . 
honourable senators , Bill C - 4 is about space exploration for the benefit of all Canadians and humanity . 
bill C - 4 enables Canada to become a full partner in this great endeavour , the construction and operation of the international space station . 
it formalizes our participation . 
our investment in international space science and technology projects like the international space station positions Canadian scientists , engineers and entrepreneurs on the world market . 
it allows this nation to continue contributing to scientific discovery and to our understanding of the universe . 
the international space station is a symbol of international cooperation , and the joint effort of the world ' s leading industrialized nations , including Canada as a key partner . 
in its final form , the station will cover an area as large as a football field and will accommodate a permanent international crew of seven astronauts , including Canadian astronauts , dedicated to advancements in areas of biotechnology , engineering , earth observation , and telecommunications . 
honourable senators , the bill before us relates to the implementation of Canada ' s obligations under the agreement concerning cooperation on the international space station and extends the application of the Canadian Criminal Code to Canadians on - board . 
all parties to the agreement have undertaken to establish a framework for mutual international cooperation in relation to the detailed design , development , operation , and use of a permanently inhabited space station for peaceful purposes . 
the bill before us brings Canadian law in line with the international obligations negotiated in the agreement , and thereby reaffirms Canada ' s strong commitment to participate in this historic project . 
the history of Canada ' s participation in the International Space Station project dates back to the year when Canada ' s first astronaut , Marc Garneau , travelled in space . 
in 1984 , President Reagan invited friends and allies to join the United States in the building , operation and use of a space station in earth orbit for peaceful purposes . 
in March 1985 , Canada accepted the invitation and notified NASA that Canada ' s contribution was to be based on the concept of the Mobile Servicing System . 
this system is nothing less than the next generation Canadarm , which would help assemble and maintain the space station once in orbit 
in 1988 , Canada , the U.S. , Europe and Japan formalized a partnership when they signed an agreement on the space station . 
this set out the broad principles and legal basis for cooperation in the space station program . 
following a redesign of the space station in 1993 , the partners formally invited Russia to join the partnership , in what became a truly International Space Station . 
on April 8 , 1997 , during a press conference with President Clinton , Prime Minister Chr é tien reaffirmed Canada ' s participation in the International Space Station program with an announcement that Canada would provide the Special Purpose Dexterous Manipulator . 
this appendage - like robotic technology , often referred to as the robotic hand , is designed to operate with the new robotic arm for delicate assembly and repair operations . 
following three years of negotiation , all parties signed a revised intergovernmental agreement on the space station on January 29 , 1998 , officially bringing Russia into the partnership . 
the agreement stipulates a two - year ratification period to January 29 , 2000 . 
bill C - 4 allows Canada to ratify this international agreement and legally endorses our commitment to the partnership . 
over and over again , in international discussions about this country ' s many accomplishments in space , Canada ' s role with respect to the Canadarm is mentioned . 
most important , the success of the Canadarm has given Canada the credibility to venture further , with the full confidence of the world ' s space - faring nations , to undertake the next step in advanced space robotic systems . 
canada ' s scientific communities have privileged access to the unique microgravity environment , access that results in new technology spinoffs . 
today , Canada is already reaping the benefits of its participation in the project in terms of contracts to Canada ' s space industry and the prestige of being part of one of the greatest engineering feats in history . 
overall , Canada expects returns of three or four times the original investment , along with many high - qualified jobs . 
canada ' s participation in the assembly of the International Space Station began with flying colours . 
last December , we watched how the Canadarm and the Canadian artificial vision system were brought together to assemble the first two modules of the space station - Unity and Zarya . 
in May of this year , we watched with great pride as Julie Payette became the first Canadian to board the first two modules of the station . 
next year , Marc Garneau will participate in his third space mission , as a crew member of STS - 97 . 
that mission will be devoted mainly to installing the International Space Station ' s solar panels and will require two spacewalks , coordinated by Mr. Garneau . 
following Marc Garneau will be Chris Hadfield , on his second mission to space . 
Canadians will be watching Chris Hadfield make history by becoming the first Canadian to perform a spacewalk to install Canada ' s new robotic arm on the International Space Station . 
once the arm is installed , Canadians and the rest of the world will watch with pride as the Canadarm and the new arm for the space station work in concert to build the largest space structure and microgravity laboratory ever . 
once the entire Mobile Servicing System is operational , with the installation of the helping robotic hand functioning on the end of the arm , astronauts will be able to perform complex on - orbit tasks quickly , safely and cost effectively from the relative comfort of the space station modules . 
simply put , without the use of Canadian robotic technologies , the station could not be built or maintained efficiently and effectively . 
in March of this year , the Government of Canada provided the Canadian Space Agency with stable , ongoing funding for the Canadian Space Program . 
the funds demonstrate the government ' s strong commitment to promoting advanced sciences and technologies that are driving the global , knowledge - based economy and helping Canadians remain leaders in the field . 
our investments in space support our international commitments to the environment , as in the case of the Montreal Protocol and agreements signed in Kyoto . 
canada is the creator of RADARSAT , the remarkable satellite that has given this nation world leadership in managing the Earth from space . 
today , RADARSAT is being used to manage floods , as it did in the Manitoba Red River floods , support disaster management operations , as it did in Kobe , Japan , and provide a greater understanding of the effects of war on local populations and environments , as it did in Vietnam . 
scientific discovery is advanced by our investments in space . 
through experiments being performed by the world ' s space science community in which Canadian scientists are recognized for their decisive role , we are learning more about our universe , the effects of the sun on the earth , and how to exploit the unique microgravity environment to obtain invaluable insight into the cardiovascular system , bones , brain and effects of radiation on human organisms . 
Canadian space science experiments , for example , are addressing human disorders , including cancer and bone diseases such as osteoporosis , an ailment that affects over 1 million Canadians . 
our investment advances innovation and spinoffs in our everyday life . 
today we seem unaware of the fact that , each time we turn on the television , listen to the weather forecast , visit the doctor , turn on our portable computers , pick up our car phone or lace up our shock - absorbing running shoes , we access products and services that space has helped to advance . 
our investments also promote a space industry that employs thousands of Canadians and registers revenues of over $ 1.4 billion , of which 45 per cent are in the form of exports , the largest among the space - faring nations . 
as a result of Canada ' s industrial strategy , whereby space robotics and automation has become a strategic niche , our industry has responded with innovative technologies that are making their mark the world over . 
other leading industrialized nations are turning to Canadian expertise to help make their contribution to this space station project a reality . 
EMS Technologies of Ottawa recently won a $ 9.5 - million contract from Mitsubishi of Japan to supply electronics to Japan ' s contribution to the International Space Station . 
additional orders could bring the total contract up to $ 24 million . 
above all , our commitment to a vibrant space sector is a commitment to this nation ' s youth - our future scientists , engineers and astronauts . 
in closing , the International Space Station is about advancing telecommunications ; it is about advancing science ; it is about innovation ; it is about earth observation and space exploration . 
the ratification of Bill C - 4 is an important step to what has been a long and beneficial international engagement for this country . 
bill C - 4 , the legislation governing Canada ' s participation in this remarkable venture , represents this confident next step in this giant leap for Canada and humanity . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator Kelly , debate adjourned . 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hays , seconded by the Honourable Senator Mercier : 
that the proceedings on the Order of the Day for resuming the debate on the motion for an Address in reply to Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne addressed to both Houses of Parliament be concluded on the eighth sitting day on which the order is debated ; 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Kinsella , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare , that the motion be not now adopted but that it be amended by striking out the word " eighth " and substituting the word " fourteenth " . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to remind you that I moved , as have many deputy government leaders from both parties before me , that the speeches in reply to the Speech from the Throne be concluded on the eighth sitting day that the order is debated . 
in other words , debate would be completed in eight sitting days . 
senator Kinsella ' s main argument is that this motion would unduly limit the number of speakers allowed to speak in the Senate on this motion . 
in fact , he went so far as to say that it might be dangerous . 
therefore , I have the obligation to answer him as to why this motion was put . 
honourable senators , we have now had five sitting days of debate with an average of three senators speaking each day , I believe , for a total of 15 , nine opposition senators and six from the government side . 
although we are not governed by the following rule , it is nevertheless interesting that in the House of Commons , rule 50 ( 1 ) of their Standing Orders states : 
the proceedings on the Order of the Day for resuming debate on the motion for an Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne and on any amendments proposed thereto shall not exceed six sitting days . 
honourable senators , that is two days less than the motion that I have put proposes . 
there are , of course , similar orders in the other place , such as debate on the budget . 
why , then , is there this rule in the other place , and why would this motion be a tradition in this place ? 
i believe the reason is that the Speech from the Throne traditionally has been an opportunity for senators to speak on virtually any subject , not simply , as Senator Kinsella suggested in his speech , the vision of the government , although that is encouraged . 
in other words , a senator can rise in his or her place and speak on a subject of which other senators have no notice and to which other senators may wish to respond . 
there is a process in this chamber for making speeches , which is to give notice of inquiry or notice of motion . 
after one day ' s notice , which is required in both cases , the speech is then delivered . 
honourable senators , this is the proper way for subjects to be raised in this chamber . 
there is no impediment to doing so . 
one day ' s notice is required for very good reason . 
hence , if the Speech from the Throne is left on the Order Paper for too long a period of time , the potential exists for that order being used for purposes other than might be expected . 
senator Kinsella concludes that in terms of the numbers the time allowed for debate of the Speech from the Throne is inadequate . 
i am not trying to have fun at his expense , but on page 87 of the Debates of the Senate , he concludes : 
if it were two hours a day ... that would be a total of 16 hours . 
in that scenario , only 32 senators would have an opportunity to speak on what I assume to be , from the government ' s perspective , its whole vision for this session . 
less than one - third of the honourable senators in this house would have an opportunity to participate in the debate .... 
honourable senators , I shall correct the math of the Honourable Senator Kinsella . 
if each senator can speak for 15 minutes and we have two hours a day devoted to this discussion , then eight senators a day could speak to Her Excellency ' s address . 
therefore , if we were to allow for 16 hours of debate , eight days times two hours a day would allow 64 senators to speak , twice the number suggested by Senator Kinsella and approximately two - thirds of this chamber . 
this is hardly an unreasonable number . 
using Senator Kinsella ' s assumption of two hours a day for 14 days , this proposal would allow 112 senators to speak . 
that , I think , is more time than we need for the debate . 
senator Carstairs : 
that is more senators than we have ! 
senator Hays : 
in fact , the average number of speakers since 1967 who have addressed the Throne Speech is 20.73 , to be exact . 
therefore , by any reasonable measure , the motion made ensures that there will be an occasion for all senators to participate who wish to do so in the normal course . 
furthermore , and this will interest my colleagues on the other side , the precedents seem to favour 8 days and not 14 . 
Beauchesne ' s citation 271.1 has this to say : 
after the Address in Reply to the Speech from the Throne has been moved and seconded , a maximum of eight sitting days are allowed for completion of the resumed debate on the motion . 
honourable senators , this is exactly the same as the rules in the other place . 
in our chamber , honourable senators , this was the practice adopted by many , including my predecessor , Senator Graham . 
on October 2 , 1986 , the Progressive Conservatives , through Senator Doody , had an identical motion approved in the Senate . 
again , on December 13 , 1988 , honourable senators repeatedly approved this motion , which was unanimously approved when it was introduced by Senator Frith in 1983 . 
in summary , honourable senators , I do not think the amendment is a good one , not so much because it is based on faulty math , but because it goes against precedent and needlessly extends debate on a subject that we are giving ample time to debate . 
i believe the numbers speak for themselves . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , debate adjourned . 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable Senator Grafstein ) 
metaphor , the intimate connection between language and thought , emerged as a touchstone of history . 
logic , from Locke to Bosanquet , essayed language . 
yet they could not grasp the poetic mind . 
so poetry emerged unscathed through the ages , shrouded between history and science , between myth and truth , as the purest harbinger of literature and culture . 
the great critic Owen Barfield once wrote : " The most conspicuous point of contact between meaning and poetry is metaphor . " 
metaphor , as Shelley argued , marked out the clouded realm between words and thought . 
language was poetry before prose . 
and so the debate about the meaning of poetry and history rages on . 
is history truth , or is truth better displayed in the sparseness or austerity of poetry ? 
let us move smartly to the common era , to our cyberworld , from books to digital clicks . 
the rapid rise of the electronic media , now soon to be overtaken by the Internet , has instigated some pseudo - critics to argue , to stoke a false clamour , that the age of literature and thus the age of poetry and prose is coming to an end . 
to paraphrase Mark Twain , the announcement of literature ' s death is somewhat premature . 
one can more forcefully argue that , in the digital age , the importance of literature , the essence of poetry , now becomes even more significant to a civil society than earlier times . 
poetry encapsulates popular history and popular memory in a way that history alone cannot . 
how do we remember history ? 
in the Davidic biblical period , it was the Psalms . 
in the Peloponnesian Wars , it was the Iliad . 
in the days of the first Common Era , it was the Sermon on the Mount . 
in the First English Commonwealth , it was the daunting poetry of Milton . 
is not World War I , displayed in these pictures around us , best remembered by the poem In Flanders Field ? 
before European settlement of Canada , the poetic myths of aboriginal peoples permeated this land . 
even Jacques Cartier was a poet . 
from the time he touched the land to be called Canada , our land became rich in poets and poetry . 
there are over 1,500 published poets in Canada . 
we had the pleasure of the company of the late Jean LeMoyne in the Senate , who came here as a poet of renown . 
i am told that Canada has the largest number per capita of published poets in the world . 
all countries , large and small , come more alive through the words of their poets . 
we have a rich , if unheralded , inventory of poetry - from Atwood , to Callahan , to Klein , and Cohen , and from Johnson to Pratt to Birney to Scott . 
Louis Riel was a published poet . 
in French , from LaPointe , Miron , Legault , Henault or Roy , there continues to this day a rich and deep vein of poetry and creative imagination . 
as we approach the next millennium , honourable senators , is it not appropriate that we recognize the role of the poet in Canada ? 
from the 16 th century , the Poet Laureate was recognized as a vital and cherished part of English life . 
in the late 1930 s , the Library of Congress in Washington appropriated this idea called a Poet Consultant to the Library of Congress . 
by this simple act of Parliament , we can celebrate the artistry of poetry and unite poets , Parliament , and the people together in a greater union of creative harmony . 
the process in this bill is simple and cost effective : 
the Speaker of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Commons , acting together , shall select the Parliamentary Poet Laureate from a list of three names submitted in confidence by a committee chaired by the Parliamentary Librarian and also composed of the National Librarian , the National Archivist of Canada , the Commissioner of Official Languages for Canada , and the Chair of the Canada Council . 
the duties of the Poet Laureate are , and are meant to be , minimalist . 
the Parliamentary Poet Laureate , during the two - year term , shall : 
( a ) write poetry , especially for use in Parliament on occasions of state ; 
( b ) sponsor poetry readings ; 
( c ) give advice to the Parliamentary Librarian regarding the collection of the Library and acquisitions to enrich its cultural holdings ; and 
( e ) perform such other related duties as are requested by either Speaker or the Parliamentary Librarian . 
honourable senators , the duties encapsulated in this bill are meant not to be complex or onerous . 
nothing should interfere with the work of the poet to write poetry . 
honourable senators , I commend this modest bill to you for your thoughtful consideration . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise not to speak to this order but to request leave of the Senate to substitute my name for that of Senator Stewart , as Senator Stewart is now retired . 
i believe that the order should stand in the name of a sitting senator . 
hon. P . Derek Lewis ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
is that agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands in the name of Senator Hays . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Study Developments Respecting Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator Mercier : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be authorized to examine and report upon developments since the tabling in June 1995 of the final report of the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide , entitled : 
of Life and Death . 
in particular , the Committee shall be authorized to examine : 
the progress on the implementation of the unanimous recommendations made in the report ; 
2 . Developments in Canada respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; 
3 . Developments in foreign jurisdictions respecting the issues dealt with in the report ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than June 6 , 2000 . - ( 
honourable Senator Kinsella ) . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , we on this side are ready to conclude debate at this stage on this matter . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
present State and Future of Aboriginal Peoples 
inquiry - Debated Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Gill calling the attention of the Senate to the situation of Aboriginal Peoples , to enable us to take stock and consider appropriate measures for the future . - ( 
honourable Senator Watt ) . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I should like to leave this order standing in the name of Senator Watt , but I wish to speak to it today , if that is agreeable . 
the Hon. the Acting Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , each time I return to my province of Manitoba , I drive up Highway 59 and I pass through Brokenhead , which is an aboriginal community . 
i drive past a school called Sergeant Tommy Prince School . 
sergeant Tommy Prince was the most decorated aboriginal serviceman in both World War I and World War II. 
he actually served in World War II. 
yet , when Sergeant Prince returned home , for the next 15 years of his life , he could not vote in a federal or a provincial election . 
it has always been my view that the finest thing ever done by the Right Honourable John Diefenbaker in leading his government was to provide to the aboriginal people of this country the right to vote in federal elections . 
when I go by that school , I am mindful of the conditions of aboriginal people . 
i am mindful of them because in my experience of growing up in Halifax I had very little contact with aboriginal people . 
i occasionally saw them when they came into the city in the spring to sell mayflowers , which was the provincial flower . 
they would sometimes knock on the door and we would always purchase them . 
that was my only contact in my province with aboriginal people . 
aboriginal people are not a significant part of the population of Nova Scotia in terms of numbers . 
they are certainly a significant part in terms of what they contribute to the province . 
however , when I moved to Alberta in 1965 , I found myself in a classroom of girls at St. Mary ' s Girls High School with some young women from what was then called the Sarcee Reserve , which was located on the edge of the city . 
it was the only school they were eligible to attend at the high school level . 
those girls always sat isolated from every other member of the class . 
they rarely participated in classroom discussions and very quickly dropped out . 
very few of them made it through grade 10 , and I do not remember a single one of them making it to grade 11 . 
honourable senators , I want to say that circumstances have changed dramatically since 1965 , but the truth of the matter is that circumstances have not changed greatly for our aboriginal people in this country . 
indeed , while teaching in Winnipeg in 1981 , I remember a young man in grade 10 geography class standing up and saying , vituperatively , what he thought of aboriginal people . 
that young man left me absolutely stunned . 
i was standing in a classroom as the teacher listening to a boy of 15 talk about his fellow human beings , his fellow citizens of the province of Manitoba , spouting lies and misinformation that he could only have received from his parents , his colleagues or his fellow citizens . 
when I got over my initial shock and began to address some of the comments he was making , I realized that we needed to do a unit in that particular course on the life of aboriginal people in this country , and I proceeded to do so . 
i am afraid I never quite made it with this particular young man in terms of his belief . 
what fascinated me was that this young man had not been born in Canada . 
he was an immigrant . 
he came to Canada at the age of two or three . 
his parents were extremely well educated and sophisticated . 
his father was a professor of mathematics ; his mother was a professor at the dental college . 
these were not uneducated people . 
yet this boy had such a racist view of our aboriginal people that it was a deep shock . 
i suppose , therefore , I should not have been shocked when my daughter Catherine had an experience in grade 6 about which her teacher called me . 
Cathi had a bad experience in grade 5 and we switched schools . 
Cathi was feeling her way , so to speak , among her new classmates and so had little to say - that is , until the day on which a classroom discussion took place with respect to aboriginal people . 
the comments made by her classmates were negative . 
Cathi , for the first time in this particular class , in a moment which made her mother extremely proud , announced to the class that they did not know what they were talking about . 
she used , as her experience , the fact that when I returned to teaching after she was born , the housekeeper I hired was a Cree from Northern Alberta . 
Cathi ' s understanding of aboriginal people came from Theresa . 
Theresa taught her of the strengths of her aboriginal community . 
honourable senators , shortly after I became a member of the legislature in Manitoba , I went to visit The Pas band school . 
Oscar Lathlin , who was then the chief but is now a cabinet minister in the Province of Manitoba , had transferred the children from the Kelsey School Division in The Pas , Manitoba , in order that the children would be educated in the reserve school . 
he felt that they were not getting the kind of cultural experience within their home school that they should be getting and that the school division could not meet their needs , and he wanted them at home . 
Mr. Lathlin invited me to visit the classrooms , and so I went . 
i must tell you that it was quite remarkable . 
from children who , in 1965 , were hanging their heads in a classroom , here were children in an aboriginal school being taught aboriginal customs , language , as well as the rest of the Manitoba curriculum . 
they were bubbling , filled with enthusiasm . 
when the Northern Manitoba science fair results came out , these aboriginal children won the majority of the awards . 
it was a remarkable event to watch . 
honourable senators , I had the same experience when I visited the Children of the Earth School in Winnipeg . 
perhaps that is why I am so deeply committed to the principle of aboriginal self - government . 
i am committed to the principle because I believe that unless aboriginal people are given the opportunity to govern themselves , they will not be able to make the progress that I believe they should make and that we have a responsibility to allow them to make . 
honourable senators , it is no secret to any of you gathered in the chamber - and I know many of you are knowledgeable about aboriginal affairs - that there are fewer aboriginal people in post - secondary institutions than any other group of people in this country . 
it is true that we have made progress . 
there are now doctors and lawyers and dentists who are aboriginal . 
we look around us in this chamber and we are blessed with no less than five members of the aboriginal community , each one making a significant contribution to our institution . 
but that is not enough . 
other statistics tell us that aboriginal people have the highest mortality rate in Canada , at birth , tragically enough , but also as young people . 
they die through accidents ; they die through fires ; they die - and this is the greatest tragedy of all - through the highest suicide rate of young people in Canada . 
i do not think that any of you are surprised to know that , among our aboriginal people , diabetes runs rampant . 
one doctor described it to me as the new smallpox or measles brought by us , as white people , to this continent and causing aboriginal people to die in record numbers . 
now they are dying prematurely because of brittle diabetes . 
we know diabetes can be controlled 
not nearly enough resources are put into the health care system to ensure that diabetes no longer becomes the killer of our aboriginal people . 
it will not surprise any of you in this chamber to know that aboriginal people still have the highest unemployment rate . 
it is not unusual for 90 per cent of the able - bodied men and women in an aboriginal community to be unemployed . 
it is not unusual in some Northern Manitoba communities for children to get into trouble with the law just because , quite frankly , the juvenile detention centre in Winnipeg is considered a better place to be than their own aboriginal community . 
honourable senators , when Senator Gill spoke about his goals and his aspirations , I could not help but think that we will benefit very much from his presence here in the Senate . 
we will benefit because he will constantly keep us mindful , as do Senators Watt and Chalifoux and Adams , of the issues that impact on aboriginal people . 
aboriginal people have a right to live as full citizens in this nation . 
that means giving to them the same opportunities for quality health care , for quality education , and for quality government that every other Canadian is given . 
we have waited now a number of years for a substantive response to the report of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples . 
we have not received that substantive response . 
i urge each and every one of you in this chamber to demand from the government of the day that a substantive response come as quickly as possible . 
honourable senators , in the past few weeks I have followed with interest the visit of the members of the House of Commons to the province of British Columbia for their study and evaluation of the Nisga ' a treaty . 
the blatant racism that I believe is unfortunately still very present in our society has bubbled over . 
to my deep regret , it is fed by a political party that I only consider as a bottom - feeder . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Carstairs : 
to my aboriginal colleagues , let me assure you of my support and my encouragement as you continue the struggle to achieve real Canadian citizenship for your people . 
senator Kinsella : 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , Senator Carstairs ' speech is compelling . 
we may be building greater problems for our future . 
i am sensitive to the issue on which he rose . 
something else bothers me in Senator Carstairs ' speech . 
the Royal Commission report made a compelling case about the deaths of children , about obscene problems with education , about almost impossible problems with mental and emotional issues . 
why is it that the government has not yet forcefully responded to those particular issues ? 
does the reason have to do with money , or is it more than that ? 
senator Carstairs : 
senator Grafstein , I do not think it is just money . 
in my opinion , it is lack of political will . 
that lack of political will exists because not enough non - aboriginal Canadians in other walks of life have been willing to stand tall in defence of our aboriginal people . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable Senator Chalifoux is here . 
both she and I have been interested in the question of the homeless in Toronto . 
she has been working as assiduously as I have to convince the government to move forward on the question of homelessness . 
we are delighted that a minister has been named to coordinate this effort . 
she has done a fabulous job across this country . 
in addition , we hope , because of the inspiration in the Throne Speech , to convince the cabinet to respond soon and forcefully . 
that is our expectation . 
having said that , in examining the issue of homelessness in Toronto , I came across a very curious problem . 
under the Constitution of Canada - section 91 or 92 , I am not sure which - the government is responsible for Indians and Indian lands . 
i was surprised to discover that , notwithstanding the Constitution , the ministries were not taking constitutional responsibility for Indians who live off the reservation . 
hence , there is a severe problem confronting us in Toronto , where a large plurality of the homeless are aboriginals off the reservation , off Indian lands . 
yet , there has been no government response to that lacuna of constitutional responsibility . 
who is responsible , then ? 
i ask the senator , following her very wise speech , whether she has explored this lacuna of responsibility and whether we in this place can do anything about this constitutional irresponsibility . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I wish I could tell the honourable senator that this constitutional problem arose only with respect to homelessness , but I have been fighting a particular and similar issue in my own province with respect to health care for aboriginal children . 
when a child is removed from an aboriginal community and brought to the children ' s wing of the health sciences centre , the care of that child is paid for by the federal government because this child lives in an aboriginal community and therefore falls under federal responsibility . 
however , through some bit of logic which I do not quite understand , the Province of Manitoba is responsible for home care services . 
hence , as a result of a jurisdictional dispute between the Minister of Health at the provincial level and the Minister of Health at the federal level , these aboriginal children are frequently left living in the hospital because no services are provided to them when they return to their home community . 
we , as Canadian taxpayers , are thus paying more for their hospital care . 
more important , those children are separated from their families and from their community and not given the opportunity to maximize their recovery by being with those who love them and care for them the most . 
i wish I had a solution to the honourable senator ' s dilemma . 
all I can say to him is that we must have more debates like the one initiated by Senator Gill and hope that the other place is listening . 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , this exchange and , in particular , the interesting presentation by Senator Carstairs brought to mind Bill C - 31 , which I had the displeasure of handling in the House of Commons way back in the early 1980 s . 
at that time , we were addressing the question of women ' s rights to their birthright and to their tribal numbers . 
in the end , we were removing the aberration whereby an aboriginal man who married a non - aboriginal woman was able to transfer to his children his birthright and his claims , whereas if the sister of this same man married a non - aboriginal man , she lost all rights in her society , all rights to land and all rights to living on the reserve . 
nothing could be passed down , in terms of heritage , to the second and third generation . 
supposedly , that bill would enable women to return to their aboriginal lands , their territory , and to have all the rights and privileges that were accorded to their brothers , uncles and fathers . 
unfortunately , the bill did not provide enough money to ensure that homes or schools would be built to enable the children and families in these situations to be fully integrated into their societies . 
it is unfortunate that to this day we have not built the facilities needed to accommodate the families in their homes or to provide the schools to receive these children , a situation that has resulted in social dysfunction instead of the planned improvement in the lives of these women and their families . 
in terms of the mechanics of this chamber , could the honourable senator suggest a way in which we and our aboriginal colleagues could put pressure on the other place to meet the commitments , both constitutional or non - constitutional , that are fundamental as values in this Canadian society so that we can be together as one people ? 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , the time allocated for this debate has expired . 
is it your pleasure to extend the time to allow Senator Carstairs to answer ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , Senator Finestone has asked specifically what we in this chamber can do . 
i think we have two vehicles . 
first , we have the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples . 
that committee should be and has been examining issues of this type . 
sometimes , however , it is necessary to prod our committees a bit . 
i think what would be most welcome by the committee - it certainly has been welcomed in the past - would be a motion introduced in this chamber indicating that we wish the Aboriginal Peoples Committee to undertake a study . 
senator Finestone : 
so moved ! 
on motion of Senator Carstairs , for Senator Watt , debate adjourned . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. Lorna Milne , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lorna Milne , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
motion agreed to . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sittings of the Senate 
hon. Marjory LeBreton , for Senator Kirby , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology have power to sit while the Senate is sitting on Monday , November 29 , Tuesday , November 30 and Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the motion that is before us is unusual in that no time is specified . 
i am mindful that Tuesday is approaching and that there will not be an opportunity to do this before then , but at the very least I should like to know at what time the committee wishes to sit . 
i ask that question because the normal practice is to ask for leave for a committee to sit at a specified time even though the Senate may still be sitting at that time . 
this motion does not have any such reference . 
senator LeBreton : 
on Monday , it is not an issue . 
we will be sitting at 1:00 on Monday . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , November 30 , 1999 , at 2:00 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 13 
Tuesday , November 30 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
human Rights 
winds of Change 
Montfort Hospital of Ottawa 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
adjournment 
library of Parliament 
notice of Motion to Authorize Standing Joint Committee to Meet While the Senate is Sitting 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
organization on Security and Co - operation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly , St. Petersburg , Russia - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
organization on Security and Co - operation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly , St. Petersburg , Russia - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
transport 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Review by Transport and Communications Committee 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Government Assistance 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Role of Senate 
transport 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Response by Government 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Effect on Small Communities 
heritage 
possible Delay in Building New War Museum 
funding for New War Museum 
elections Canada 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data 
transfer of Personal Data - Principle of Consent 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data - Procedures for Security of Personal Data 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Fund to Purchase Aboriginal Licenses 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
solicitor General 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service - Loss of Classified Documents - Review by Security Intelligence Review Committee 
international Trade 
north America Free Trade Agreement - Suit by California Company Over Loss of Contract for Bulk Water - Government Position 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
second Report of Committee Adopted 
third Report of Committee - Order Stands 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , November 30 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
human Rights 
winds of Change 
hon. Calvin Woodrow Ruck : 
at the outbreak of the war , it would appear , a considerable number of RCMP officers decided to change their RCMP uniform for military uniforms . 
they joined branches of the army , navy and air force . 
consequently , that left a rather large vacancy in the ranks of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
the RCMP officer in charge at the Sydney detachment advertised in the local papers for young , able - bodied men to enlist in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
those two young black men were among the people who wanted to enlist . 
the officer in charge in Sydney did not know what to do with these two young black men . 
at that point in time , no blacks had ever joined the RCMP - at least not in Sydney , Cape Breton . 
the officer in charge contacted Division H Headquarters in Halifax for instructions on how to handle the situation involving those two young black men . 
the members of the Halifax detachment were not too sure what to do either ; therefore , they contacted headquarters in our beautiful capital city , Ottawa . 
neither of those two men ever joined the RCMP . 
at that time it appeared to be rather a closed shop . 
subsequently , word spread that the RCMP were enlisting members of the black community . 
others also decided that they wanted to join ; however , they , too , did not have any luck in joining . 
the Ottawa officer in charge wrote to the Halifax officer in charge and told them to allow applicants to take the examination and perhaps they would not pass . 
it appears that they did not pass , because neither of those two men ever wore the scarlet red of the RCMP . 
that is an indication of what was happening back then . 
the winds of change are blowing throughout Nova Scotia and , I believe , throughout many parts of Canada . 
a considerable number of black men are now members of the RCMP and it is my understanding that they are doing a good job . 
they are carrying out the duties assigned to them - all in the name of justice and equality for all . 
we see these changes taking place and it provides a big lift to the members of our communities . 
our young men can now aspire to many positions for which , years ago , we were not considered qualified . 
however , that has changed . 
many of our young men and women are attending university , and from there they proceed to obtain their law degrees and open law practices . 
( 1410 ) 
the provincial ombudsman in Nova Scotia is a young black man who happens to be my son , Douglas Ruck . 
he was the first black person in Nova Scotia , to the best of my knowledge , to receive such an honour . 
he spent some time speaking to people here in Ottawa about setting up a national organization of that type . 
he has travelled around quite a bit . 
the winds of change are blowing throughout Nova Scotia in respect of both eligibility and consideration of people . 
we can do the job provided that we are given the opportunity and provided that we are treated as equals . 
that is happening . 
there have been major improvements . 
many of our young people , male and female , are going on to university and ending up with good jobs . 
that is basically where we are . 
we keep telling our young people to stay in school , to get an education and to make a contribution to the development of our province and our country . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
Montfort Hospital of Ottawa 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , November 29 , 1999 is a date that will go down in Canadian history . 
in a unanimous judgment , three justices of the Ontario Divisional Court were in favour of maintaining Montfort Hospital . 
according to their decision , the Government of Ontario ' s Health Services Restructuring Commission acted illegally in ordering the closure of this hospital , the only French - language teaching hospital in Ontario . 
Ontario ' s French Canadians , while rejoicing at the decision , are still concerned , because the Ontario government has made the decision to pass the buck back to the Health Services Restructuring Commission , with the indication that it is up to the commission to settle the matter . 
the commission was quick to respond yesterday that its sole mandate was the restructuring of Ontario ' s health services . 
we are in somewhat of a bind here . 
the question that arises is to see who will have the courage and integrity to move on this . 
the courts have handed down their decision ; now it is up to the government to act . 
in closing , I would like to thank , from the bottom of my heart , all those who have invested time and money to ensure that the francophones of Ontario might finally obtain justice . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
hear hear ! 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , as Senator Gauthier so aptly put it , November 1999 will go down in Canadian history . 
yesterday , the Ontario Divisional Court sided with Montfort Hospital . 
the court ruled that the decision of Ontario ' s Health Services Restructuring Commission to reduce services at Montfort Hospital violated the very principle of minority protection and respect , a principle entrenched in the Canadian Constitution . 
the court therefore struck down the commission ' s directives . 
in this morning ' s edition , Le Droit writes that Gis è le Lalonde , President of SOS Montfort , called the decision the greatest victory ever won by francophones in Ontario , or even in Canada . 
honourable senators , the President of SOS Montfort , Gis è le Lalonde , the Chair of the hospital ' s board of directors , Michelle de Courville - Nicol , the Association canadienne - fran ç aise de l ' Ontario , the Honourable Jean - Robert Gauthier , and all those who fought to save the only French - language hospital in Ontario deserve our sincere congratulations . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , tabled the first report of the committee pursuant to rule 104 . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee 
hon. Lorna Milne , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , November 30 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal records Act and to amend another Act in consequence , has , in obedience to the Order of Reference of Wednesday , November 17 , 1999 , examined the said Bill and now reports the same with the following amendments : 
page 2 to 4 , clause 6 : 
( a ) replace line 42 on page 2 with the following : 
" 6.3 ( 1 ) The definitions in this subsection apply in this section . 
" children " means persons who are less than 18 years of age . 
" vulnerable persons " means persons who , because of their age , a disability or other circumstances , whether temporary or permanent , 
( a ) are in a position of dependence on others ; or 
( b ) are otherwise at a greater risk than the general population of being harmed by persons in a position of authority or trust relative to them . 
( 2 ) The Commissioner shall make , in " ; 
( b ) replace , in the French version , line 43 on page 2 with the following : 
" royale du Canada une indication permettant " ; 
( c ) replace lines 2 and 3 on page 3 with the following : 
" an individual ' s conviction for a sexual offence listed in the schedule in respect of which a pardon " ; 
( d ) add after line 5 on page 4 the following : 
" ( 9 ) The Governor in Council may , by order , amend the schedule by adding or deleting a reference to a sexual offence . " ; and 
( e ) make consequential changes to the numbering of provisions and any cross - references to them . 
( a ) delete lines 5 and 6 on page 5 ; 
( b ) delete lines 11 to 13 on page 5 ; 
( c ) make consequential changes to the numbering of provisions and any cross - references to them . 
3 . Page 5 : add after line 27 on page 5 the following : 
4 . Page 6 : add after line 3 the following : 
" schedule 
( section 8.1 ) 
schedule 
subsections 6.3 ( 1 ) and ( 9 )) 
1 . 
offences under the following provisions of the Criminal Code : 
( a ) subsection 7 ( 4.1 ) 
( sexual offence against a child by an act or omission outside Canada ) ; 
( b ) section 151 ( sexual interference with a person under 14 ) ; 
( c ) section 152 ( invitation to a person under 14 to sexual touching ) ; 
( d ) section 153 ( sexual exploitation of a person 14 or more but under 18 ) ; 
( e ) section 153.1 ( sexual exploitation of a person with a disability ) ; 
( f ) section 155 ( incest ) ; 
( g ) section 159 ( anal intercourse ) ; 
( h ) subsection 160 ( 3 ) ( bestiality in the presence of a person under 14 or inciting a person under 14 to commit bestiality ) ; 
( i ) paragraph 163 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( obscene materials ) ; 
( j ) paragraph 163 ( 2 ) ( a ) ( obscene materials ) ; 
( k ) section 163.1 ( child pornography ) ; 
( l ) section 168 ( mailing obscene matter ) ; 
( m ) section 170 ( parent or guardian procuring sexual activity ) ; 
( n ) section 171 ( householder permitting sexual activity ) ; 
( o ) section 172 ( corrupting children ) ; 
( p ) section 173 ( indecent acts ) ; 
( q ) subsection 212 ( 2 ) ( living on avails of prostitution of a person under 18 ) ; 
( r ) subsection 212 ( 2.1 ) 
( living on avails of prostitution of a person under 18 ) ; 
( s ) subsection 212 ( 4 ) ( obtain , or attempt to obtain , sexual services of a person under 18 ) ; 
( t ) section 271 ( sexual assault ) ; 
( u ) subsection 272 ( 1 ) and paragraph 272 ( 2 ) ( a ) ( sexual assault with firearm ) ; 
( v ) subsection 272 ( 1 ) and paragraph 272 ( 2 ) ( b ) ( sexual assault other than with firearm ) ; 
( w ) section 273 ( aggravated sexual assault ) ; 
b ) ( removal of child 14 or more but under 18 from Canada for purpose of listed offences ) ; 
( z .3 ) 
( z .6 ) 
section 463 with respect to an attempt to commit an offence listed in this section or with respect to being an accessory after the fact to the commission of an offence listed in this schedule . 
( a ) subsection 146 ( 1 ) ( sexual intercourse with a female under 14 ) ; 
( b ) subsection 146 ( 2 ) ( sexual intercourse with a female 14 or more but under 16 ) ; 
( c ) section 151 ( seduction of a female 16 or more but under 18 ) ; 
( d ) section 153 ( sexual intercourse with stepdaughter , etc. , or female employee ) ; 
( e ) section 155 ( buggery or bestiality ) ; 
( f ) section 157 ( gross indecency ) ; 
( g ) section 166 ( parent or guardian procuring defilement ) ; and 
( h ) section 167 ( householder permitting defilement ) . 
( a ) section 144 ( rape ) ; 
( b ) section 145 ( attempt to commit rape ) ; 
( c ) section 149 ( indecent assault on female ) ; 
( d ) section 156 ( indecent assault on male ) ; 
( e ) section 245 ( common assault ) ; and 
( f ) subsection 246 ( 1 ) ( assault with intent to commit an indictable offence ) . " 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration , honourable senators ? 
on motion of Senator Milne , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that , when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
library of Parliament 
notice of Motion to Authorize Standing Joint Committee to Meet While the Senate is Sitting 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament have power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; and 
that a message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House thereof . 
[ later ] 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
organization on Security and Co - operation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly , St. Petersburg , Russia - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
leave having been given to revert to Tabling of Reports from Inter - Parliamentary Delegations : 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian delegation of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association which represented Canada at the eighth annual meeting of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization on Security and Co - operation in Europe , held in St. Petersburg , Russia , from July 6 to 12 , 1999 . 
organization on Security and Co - operation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly , St. Petersburg , Russia - Notice of Inquiry 
leave having been given to revert to Notices of Inquiries : 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , December 2 , 1999 , I will draw the attention of the Senate to the report of the Canadian delegation of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association which represented Canada at the eighth annual meeting of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe , held in St. Petersburg , Russia , from July 6 to 12 , 1999 . 
question PERIOD 
transport 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i am sure the minister , who also comes from Atlantic Canada , has taken particular note of the fact that one of our regional airline carriers is out of operation these days . 
that has a direct impact on not only the airports in our region but on a significant segment of the workforce . 
( 1420 ) 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , unfortunately , I have not had the opportunity to read , nor did I hear , the statement made by the President of Inter - Canadian Airlines . 
it is my understanding that Inter - Canadian continues to have discussions with its key constituents , that is , its employees , NAVCAN , Canadian Airlines , and certain other financial stakeholders . 
the goal is to resolve some of the difficulties and to ensure that services will continue . 
i am also informed that air service is being maintained at all points served by Inter - Canadian except the three locations where alternate options are available . 
this underscores the uncertain times with respect to the airline industry . 
it places all the more emphasis on the principles advanced by the Minister of Transport both to the House of Commons and publicly . 
i should like to reiterate those principles here for honourable senators . 
the policy statement issued by the minister clearly enunciated the five public policy objectives of the government , namely , protection of consumers against price gouging ; continued services to small communities , which is of particular interest to the honourable senator ; protection of the rights and concerns of employees ; maintenance of competition insofar as that is possible ; and effective Canadian control . 
these remain the policy objectives of the government . 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Review by Transport and Communications Committee 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the minister for his reply . 
i have taken note that he has drawn in his reply from the statement the Minister of Transport made first in Saint John , New Brunswick in late summer or early fall , in which he enunciated those five principles . 
the Minister of Transport also rearticulated those principles when he appeared before the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications and when he appeared before the House of Commons Standing Committee on Transport . 
that seems to be the cornerstone of the government ' s response to the Inter - Canadian disruption , which is real . 
on August 13 , the disruption or emergency was only an apprehended one that led the government to invoke the extraordinary power set out in section 47 of the Transportation Act . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I recognize the concern implicit in the honourable senator ' s question . 
however , I think his question is more properly directed to the chair of the committee . 
i do not wish to usurp the authority of the committee on that subject . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , I would have addressed my question to the chair of the committee . 
indeed , out of courtesy I attempted to reach the senator but was advised that she would not be in town all week . 
Atlantic Canada and other parts of Eastern Canada are experiencing a disruption in regional air service . 
it is real . 
it is not something that is theoretically being apprehended , which was the decision of the government when it invoked section 47 . 
the order was referred to the committee . 
i was present at some of the meetings of the committee when it considered the five principles enunciated by the minister . 
does the minister not think that some measure ought to be taken so that our Transport Committee can meet this week ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I know that the minister is very aware of the situation . 
in fact , he continues to monitor it closely . 
it is our belief that no serious disruption will occur in any of the locations served by Inter - Canadian Airlines . 
in some areas , unfortunately , Inter - Canadian ' s lack of service has had no real impact at all , which is the case in Sydney where they had already withdrawn all service prior to today . 
the honourable senator ' s question is a significant one . 
the minister continues to monitorthe situation . 
i shall certainly convey the honourable senator ' s concern to the minister and , at the first opportunity , to the chair of the committee . 
i feel quite uncomfortable stating that a committee of the Senate should meet otherwise than on the decision of that committee and its chair . 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Government Assistance 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
my question relates to the status of Inter - Canadian Inc. , Canada ' s largest independent regional air carrier . 
as Senator Kinsella has already indicated , citizens in Atlantic Canada have been serviced by this regional airline . 
however , for the last three days hundreds and hundreds of citizens have had their schedules seriously disrupted by the closure and the grounding of the company ' s airplanes . 
the company itself says that it is working on a survival plan . 
since part of their survival plan means that they need $ 15 million immediately , what is the Government of Canada prepared to do to assist them in that urgent financial need at this moment ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Government of Canada is prepared to attempt to ensure that no location is left without service . 
as far as I am aware , at the moment there is no location where an alternative service does not exist . 
the minister has indicated that he will monitor the situation . 
i am sure he is in touch with the people involved at Inter - Canadian . 
the prudent thing in the judgment of government at this time is to monitor the situation and to ensure that alternate service is available . 
senator Oliver : 
honourable senators , the honourable minister has said that , as far as he knows , there is no location in Atlantic Canada that is left without service . 
however , service has been seriously disrupted . 
many people have had their schedules delayed and have been inconvenienced by the closure and the grounding of the airplanes . 
in response to Senator Kinsella , the Leader of the Government has said that alternative options are available . 
surely , that is not a permanent solution . 
can the minister please tell us what this government will do of a permanent nature to ensure that Inter - Canadian Airlines will have an opportunity to fly again soon with a permanent plan ? 
in the past , this government has helped out Canadian Airlines , financially and otherwise . 
what will it do for an airline that services Atlantic Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
in fact , that is the most important matter that is occupying the Minister of Transport and the government . 
the permanent solution must take into account the policy objectives I indicated a short time ago . 
whether or not the permanent solution involves Inter - Canadian , or whomever , I cannot say at this time . 
in the meantime , we must ensure that communities are not left without service . 
as far as I am aware , that is the case now . 
there are no communities left without alternative service . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Role of Senate 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
as the polls show , a great majority of Western Canadians support the Prime Minister ' s tough stand against the sovereigntists in Quebec . 
even if the Bouchard government accepts the four - year truce offered by the Prime Minister , that does not preclude the need to continue laying the political and legal groundwork to deal with any future referendum . 
( 1430 ) 
since the Prime Minister has brought this issue to the fore , does the government leader think there is any role for the Senate to contribute in a meaningful way to a calm , well - considered discussion of the future of a united Canada ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , certainly any senator has an opportunity to raise that issue in the Senate . 
obviously , it is a matter of great concern to all senators . 
in any discussion of these particular issues , I would certainly anticipate that the views of honourable senators would be taken into account . 
the Prime Minister has not indicated at the moment how he might choose to address the important issue of the clarity of the question and the issue of the majority . 
i am sure honourable senators will have an opportunity to express their views on these very important issues . 
transport 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Response by Government 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
three days ago , the President of Inter - Canadian Airlines wrote a letter to the Minister of Transport . 
that letter said , in part : 
this is to inform you that Inter - Canadian has now reached the final desperate condition that we have been openly warning you about for many months . 
ever since the summer , when the question of the takeover of Air Canada by Onex Corporation arose , the attention of the government has been concentrated on the future of the two major airlines . 
why has the government ignored the concerns of the regional airlines and their passengers during this process ? 
why has this not been of concern to the government , when the president of Inter - Canadian warned the Minister of Transport months ago that this merger process of the major airlines would have serious effects on regional carriers and their passengers ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , service to all Canadians has always been and will remain a central issue in the deliberations of both the Minister of Transport and the government . 
how it may impact on the particular fortunes of a certain carrier at a given point in time is another question . 
however , it remains a central feature of government policy that service to all areas of Canada should be maintained , including service to the small communities that Inter - Canadian serves . 
i cannot comment on the views or actions of the president of this company . 
however , I can comment on the position of the government , and I am confident that the principle of service to small communities will be maintained as a central feature of government policy . 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Effect on Small Communities 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
there has been some concern in the past two days about the substantial loss of jobs at Inter - Canadian Airlines . 
however , the loss of jobs goes well beyond the 800 or 900 employees of that airline . 
there are also many workers who service the airplanes at the airports out of which Inter - Canadian flies . 
their jobs are also on the line . 
i know , for example , that as of Sunday , the day before yesterday , there were layoffs of ground personnel at my airport in Stephenville , Newfoundland . 
i also wish to tell you that there has been no service as of twelve o ' clock Saturday night between my airport in Stephenville and the mainland of Canada . 
has the government considered the domino effect here and the potentially serious impact that it could have on these small communities in Atlantic Canada , Quebec and elsewhere ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
on the specific issue of service to Stephenville , the honourable senator indicates there has been no air service out of Stephenville by Air Canada or Air Nova . 
senator Cochrane : 
that is correct . 
senator Boudreau : 
that is not the information that I have in my briefing note . 
however , I shall certainly convey the information to the minister and ask that he provide more detailed information on the matter . 
senator Kinsella : 
check out the northeastern part of New Brunswick as well . 
heritage 
possible Delay in Building New War Museum 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government in the Senate in relation to the Canadian War Museum . 
the Honourable Barnie Danson , Chair of the War Museum , a veteran , a Privy Councillor , a former minister of defence , has been working very hard to try to persuade the government to consider supporting the building of a new museum . 
if you go to the museum or out to Vimy House , both of which are bursting at the seams , you realize how desperate they are for a new museum . 
it was suggested that one would be built in Rockcliffe , adjacent to the National Aviation Museum . 
is the government seriously considering supporting the development of a new museum , or is the government simply paying lip service to the subject ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the government is seriously considering such support . 
as a matter of fact , the government has committed to making the 20 - acre Rockcliffe site available to the museum . 
as the project progresses , additional funds will be required from other sources , including private funds . 
the government will continue to be involved , and I wish to emphasize once again that the site has been committed . 
senator Atkins : 
senator Boudreau : 
i am not aware , honourable senators , of any decision to put the project on the back burner . 
i have provided honourable senators with the most updated information I have . 
sources of funding are being investigated within government , as well as from the private sector . 
i undertake to make an inquiry , but I do not have any information regarding the subject raised by Senator Atkins . 
senator Atkins : 
perhaps the minister could confirm that . 
rumours also indicate that Mr. Danson is so upset that he is ready to resign from the Canadian War Museum because of the position of the government . 
senator Boudreau : 
again , honourable senators , I do not have information on that subject . 
however , I shall certainly raise the honourable senator ' s concerns with the minister . 
funding for New War Museum 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
is it a fact that government funding for a new war museum is contingent upon obtaining private funding ? 
whatever can be the justification for such a policy ? 
( 1440 ) 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , my understanding is that there was an expectation that private funding would be involved , though I am not certain about the extent of such funding . 
there was an expectation that there would be private fundraising as well . 
senator Murray : 
the minister will know that there are other national museums , for example , the Museum of Civilization , the National Art Gallery , and so on . 
is the minister able to tell us of any case in the past where federal funding for the construction and operation of those national museums was made contingent upon raising private funds ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I can certainly think of examples involving where federal funding participated with private sector funding to bring very worthwhile projects into being . 
whether or not we are speaking about national museums , I could not say at this point . 
hon. Michael A . Meighen : 
honourable senators , surely the Leader of the Government in the Senate recognizes that the preferable practice and the better way of doing things is for government , in such a case as the National War Museum , to take the lead . 
private funding would then come in afterwards , not the reverse . 
is that the understanding of the Leader of the Government , or is it the reverse ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
other sources of revenue within government are being examined . 
it is hoped that the project will come together at a time in the near future . 
senator Meighen : 
senator Boudreau : 
however , it is in the interests of all parties that it stand a reasonable chance of success . 
elections Canada 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , according to today ' s Globe and Mail , the privacy of 675,000 Manitobans - that is , every driver in the province - was breached in January when an Elections Canada official mislaid a tape containing confidential data . 
that tape contained names , addresses , birthdays , genders and driver ' s licences . 
this private information is valuable to legitimate businesses and to criminal operations . 
we are told that it is likely in a landfill site and that Elections Canada has put in place measures to ensure that a similar incident never happens again . 
it is also clear that a fundamental principle of privacy protection has been violated , namely , the principle of consent . 
data collected for one purpose should never be used for another purpose without the consent of the individual who originally supplied the information . 
some Manitobans were not given the opportunity to consent by either level of government . 
i have two questions for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
first , will the government apologize to the people of Manitoba for this unfortunate incident ? 
second , will the government adjust its cavalier attitude and adhere to the basic principle of consent - both in the information it receives from other governments and any other information it may send to them ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the incident mentioned by the honourable senator was truly an unfortunate incident and certainly not trivial . 
the information was on a tape containing personal data from the Manitoba division of driver and vehicle licensing . 
elections Canada had the tape and acknowledged that it was discarded in the waste container and was not recovered . 
this tape contained information such as the names , addresses , dates of birth , genders and licence numbers of individuals . 
elections Canada has accepted full responsibility for the loss , and I have no difficulty in extending an apology on behalf of the government to all those who were affected . 
immediately following the incident , Elections Canada reported the loss to the provincial officials who had forwarded the original information . 
an investigation was commenced immediately . 
subsequently they brought in an external auditor to audit their security processes and then implemented the auditor ' s recommended changes . 
regrettably , this incident did occur ; hopefully , there will be no repetition . 
transfer of Personal Data - Principle of Consent 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , I certainly appreciate the honourable leader offering an apology . 
that will be most appreciated . 
however , I do not know if I received a complete answer to the question on principle of consent . 
if that answer is not available to the leader today , I would appreciate a delayed answer on the government ' s policy on this very basic principle . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not completely certain I understand the nature of the follow - up question . 
perhaps I could prevail upon the honourable senator to repeat her concern . 
senator Spivak : 
i understand that data which is collected for one purpose should not be used for another purpose without the consent of the individual . 
there is a tremendous amount of information , as we are hearing in another forum , given to government and to other agencies . 
for example , businesses sell lists without people ' s consent . 
this is becoming a particular problem . 
it is highlighted by this incident , which I understand was an accident . 
nevertheless , this points to the necessity for clarification of what I think is an extremely important principle . 
senator Boudreau : 
i wish to thank the honourable senator for clarifying the question . 
i understand the point that is being made . 
i shall attempt to obtain a specific statement on that policy and convey it to the honourable senator . 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data - Procedures for Security of Personal Data 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , when the legislation for the Canada Elections Act was before the Senate , some of us questioned these very provisions , namely , how secure our personal information will be and whether or not there will be sufficient procedures in place . 
we were assured , by both the Government of Canada and Elections Canada , that this kind of thing could not happen . 
i find it curious that both the leader and Elections Canada are saying that Elections Canada is now putting in place procedures so that such incidents will not happen again . 
is that , therefore , an indication that there were no such procedures and double checks on the system in place from the time the Elections Act was passed until now ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would not want my honourable colleague to draw that conclusion . 
however , recommendations were made for additional measures and those measures were implemented . 
a huge amount of information is transferred to Elections Canada and , thank goodness , an incident such as this one is rare . 
in fact , it draws our attention because it is so rare . 
one can be assured that the measures have been strengthened . 
no matter what measures are put in place , I do not know if I would be so bold as to say that at no point in the future would information be released in a way that was not intended . 
however , I am advised and assured that the measures are now being strengthened , and I hope they will prevent the recurrence of such an event . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , as a result of this very serious breach , would it not be appropriate to have some watchdog facility , organization or procedure in place that would ensure that it does not happen again ? 
we received all these assurances before and it seems that the matter was transferred rather cavalierly , using new technologies . 
my confidence is shaken because , in the legislative process , particularly with regard to confidentiality , most of us wanted the system to work and cooperated to that end . 
is it not now time to have some external scrutiny to ensure that the procedures are in place ? 
( 1450 ) 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , in this particular instance the Province of Manitoba was advised almost immediately and made aware of the process that was taking place . 
i am also informed that the Privacy Commissioner was kept informed throughout , endorsed the changes that were made , and was at least content that all reasonable measures have now been taken to ensure that a similar incident would not occur again . 
fisheries and Oceans 
maritime Provinces - Supreme Court Decision Upholding Native Fishing Rights - Fund to Purchase Aboriginal Licenses 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , on November 4 , I asked the minister if he had details of the proposal to set $ 500 million aside to fund the purchase of licences for aboriginal fishermen in Atlantic Canada . 
at that time , the minister was not able to provide details . 
he will recall that the question was in relation to the Marshall decision by the Supreme Court . 
is the minister able to provide further details today ? 
if not , could he seek details on this matter from the pertinent department ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not in a position to give the honourable senator any greater detail today than I did on the previous day on which he raised the matter . 
i will certainly have discussions on this issue with the Minister of Fisheries . 
senator Comeau : 
honourable senators , the minister should be aware that this is no trivial matter in Atlantic Canada , especially in Nova Scotia , in the wake of the breakdown of the deal that was reached between the fishermen and the native community . 
obviously , this will have a great impact on the future of coastal communities , and I think the minister should attach a great amount of importance to the situation . 
it impacts on all of Canada , especially the area with which the minister is most familiar . 
he should exert some pressure to resolve this issue . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I accept that this is a matter of great import , and it will be very much front and centre for some time . 
it is important that all Canadians understand that the solutions brought to bear on this very significant issue must be solutions which are participated in and paid for , in the broad sense , by all Canadians , not only by the fishermen in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have delayed answers to questions asked in the Senate on November 16 , 1999 , by Senator Kinsella , Senator Rivest and Senator Bolduc , regarding the Canadian Security Intelligence Service ; the loss of classified documents , and the review by the Security Intelligence Review Committee . 
i also have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 18 , 1999 by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the North American Free Trade Agreement , suit by California company over loss of contract for bulk water . 
solicitor General 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service - Loss of Classified Documents - Review by Security Intelligence Review Committee 
( response to questions raised by Hon. No ë l A . Kinsella , Hon. Jean - Claude Rivest and Hon. Roch Bolduc on November 16 , 1999 ) 
( questions on the reviews and notification of SIRC : ) 
as the chair of the Security Intelligence Review Committee , Madame Paule Gauthier , said in recent press interviews , neither the Solicitor General nor the Director of CSIS is required to notify her of all such incidents . 
CSIS itself has been conducting an internal security investigation and the Inspector General for CSIS , who reports to the Solicitor General , is also doing an investigation . 
the SIRC has started a review on its own initiative . 
let SIRC and the Inspector General get on with their work . 
these are independent review mechanisms with full powers of access to CSIS information , as established by an Act of Parliament . 
( questions regarding the Prime Minister ' s comments ) 
the Prime Minister is aware that there are three reviews underway into the matter , including those by the Security Intelligence Review Committee ( SIRC ) and the Inspector General for CSIS . 
the government is confident that these two independent review bodies , as provided for by an Act of Parliament , have full access to CSIS information , and will do their work well . 
it is important to let them get on with their work . 
( questions regarding the classification of the document and security procedures : ) 
because there are ongoing investigations and review , it would be inappropriate to comment on the exact nature of the missing documents , or the handling procedures for documents of this nature . 
the Director of CSIS has provided assurances that all necessary steps are being taken to ensure strict adherence to established security policies . 
again , let the SIRC and the Inspector General for CSIS get on with their independent reviews . 
( questions regarding the CSIS Director ) 
the government has confidence in the Director ' s abilities and again , I would urge my colleagues to let both CSIS itself , and the external review mechanisms of SIRC and the Inspector General , get on with their review . 
parliamentary Committees are free to invite any witness they deem appropriate . 
international Trade 
north America Free Trade Agreement - Suit by California Company Over Loss of Contract for Bulk Water - Government Position 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 18 , 1999 ) 
the MMT case did not set a precedent for the government ' s response to any other NAFTA Chapter 11 case . 
each case is considered on its own merits . 
the panel established under the Agreement on Internal Trade ( AIT ) reported before the other legal challenges reached the report stage . 
it found the MMT measure on interprovincial trade to be inconsistent with the objectives of the agreement . 
to bring the legislation into conformity with the AIT panel ruling , Canada removed MMT from the list of chemicals subject to the ban on interprovincial trade and importation . 
this also allowed Canada to settle with Ethyl Corporation . 
the MMT NAFTA case had not moved beyond jurisdictional arguments , and no final award was issued . 
sun Belt Water Inc. ( Sun Belt ) , of California submitted a " Notice of Intent to Submit a Claim to Arbitration " last year , pursuant to the investor - state dispute settlement provisions of NAFTA Chapter 11 . The submission of this document did not start formal NAFTA arbitration ; NAFTA arbitration can only be started with the submission of a Notice of Arbitration . 
on two separate occasions , most recently in November 1999 , Sun Belt has attempted to initiate an arbitration by serving a Notice of Arbitration on Canada . 
however , both documents did not meet the procedural requirements of NAFTA Chapter 11 , and accordingly , Canada informed Sun Belt that in the view of Canada , no arbitration under Chapter 11 had started . 
our position is that no NAFTA Chapter 11 arbitration begins unless Sun Belt submits a valid Notice of Arbitration . 
in the documents submitted to date , Sun Belt alleges that British Columbia , from 1989 to the present , took various " measures " contrary to NAFTA Chapter 11 claim , including the issuance of bulk water export licences in 1989 , and the conduct of the Attorney General in legal action starting in January 1993 . The alleged NAFTA breaches by Canada include National Treatment ( Article 1102 ) , Minimum Standard of Treatment ( Article 1105 ) and Expropriation without Compensation ( Article 1110 ) . 
BC ' s 1991 moratorium and regulations prohibiting the export of bulk water are alleged to be in breach of international law , but no direct reference is made to breaches of NAFTA . 
canada continues to seek increased transparency in the investor - state dispute proceedings . Wherever 
possible , Canada will encourage openness in these proceedings and ask the claimant to do the same . 
canada has every intention to vigorously defend the claim brought against it by Sun Belt under NAFTA Chapter 11 , if it is properly submitted to arbitration . 
in the DESONA case , a Chapter 11 tribunal recently found completely in favour of Mexico , concluding that Mexico did not breach any of its Chapter 11 obligations in this case . 
this is the first time a NAFTA Chapter 11 investor - state tribunal has made a final award . 
in its findings , the tribunal placed clear limitations on the interpretations of Chapter 11 investment obligations which were raised in the case . 
the award shows that NAFTA Chapter 11 obligations are not open ended and that there are limits to their scope . 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
5 th day of resuming debate ) 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , some 80 years ago there was inscribed in the Peace Tower , that magnificent symbol of peace which gives world - renowned character to Canada ' s Parliament , the words from Proverbs : " Where there is no vision , the people perish . " 
as we prepare to move into a new century and a new millennium , we should think deeply about this scriptural admonition . 
what is our vision ? 
what do we see for Canada ; a bounteous land blessed with space , industry , resources , technological advancement , and immense human energies ? 
how do we see Canada related to the world at this pivotal moment in world history where human beings have in their power the means to fashion human security for everyone on God ' s planet ? 
the advent of the new century cries out for us to focus our attention not just upon ourselves in this blessed country but on the whole world community that has been made by the marvels of technology . 
when we look at the world as a whole , we should be startled and ashamed of the huge amount of suffering tolerated by the political systems of the world . 
the 20 th century was the bloodiest century in the history of humanity , with more than 110 million people killed in wars , three times as many as all the war deaths in all the previous centuries from the first century AD . 
while wars are being fought , consuming vast amounts of resources , the world ' s poorest people are falling farther behind . 
sixty countries have been getting steadily poorer since 1980 . 
housing , health , and education services are desperately needed throughout the world . 
( 1500 ) 
although we in Canada are blessed beyond belief by world standards , we have no reason to be smug or complacent . 
in the past ten years , the number of poor people in Canada has risen from 3.7 million to more than 5 million , which is 18 per cent of the population . 
more than 1.5 million children , which is one in five of all the children in the country , live in poverty . 
homelessness has been called a national disaster by the mayors of Canada ' s ten largest cities . 
across Canada , governments have slashed social , health and education funding . 
government deficits have been reduced on the backs of the poor . 
in the 1990 s , Canada ' s Official Development Assistance programs were cut 37 per cent , yet our military spending today is only 19 per cent lower than in the peak years of spending during the Cold War . 
canada spent $ 690 million participating in the Gulf War and $ 18 million just for the bombs that were dropped on Kosovo and Serbia last spring . 
gross disparities and misplaced priorities at home and abroad are staring us in the face . 
social justice in a world of plenty seems farther off than ever . 
we fight wars that should not be fought . 
the major powers maintain nuclear weapons that constantly endanger humanity . 
governments of the world spend money on excessive militarism at the expense of the poor . 
in brief , government priorities for military spending are wildly disproportionate to expenditures on economic and social development at a time when the lack of development is now recognized as the most acute security threat facing the least developed states . 
a double standard of immense proportions prevails in which governments in one breath plead an inability to fund social needs because of deficits and in the next breath appropriate huge sums for warfare and its preparation . 
the very year following the 1990 Children ' s Summit , which amounted to rhetoric and little cash , government suddenly found $ 60 billion to prosecute the Gulf War . 
so powerful is the arms industry and so all - pervading its influence that it has seeped into nearly every aspect of Western society . 
western countries spend $ 483 billion annually on defence but only $ 48 billion on Official Development Assistance , which is supposed to lift up the human security needs of the most destabilized areas of the world . 
even this small amount of aid money is questioned , but the military appropriations go through the governmental processes unchallenged . 
the reality is that sustainable economic development could remove many pre - war tensions . 
that should be the lesson we take from the 1990 s . 
there are times when the use of force may be legitimate in the pursuit of peace ; however , unless the Security Council is restored to its preeminent position as the sole source of legitimacy on the use of force , the world is on a dangerous path to anarchy . 
NATO cannot be permitted to determine by itself when force will be used , yet the NATO 50 th Anniversary Summit , occurring shortly after the Kosovo bombing began , took a deliberate decision to set itself up as the arbiter on when it would use force . 
NATO ' s excessive arrogance is now reinforcing inequality and distrust . 
the Russians and the Chinese will never accept a NATO - dominated world . 
already the consequences of the Kosovo War have spread far beyond the human toll . 
the hopes for a cooperative global security system have been dashed on the rocks of power . 
the trust engendered during the supposed end to the Cold War is now shattered . 
a new nuclear arms race is certain , unless Washington , Moscow and Beijing can quickly put collaborative efforts back on track . 
the world is staring into an abyss of nuclear weapons , as India and Pakistan have vividly demonstrated . 
the danger of nuclear weapons is growing . 
the recognition of that should galvanise intelligent and committed people in both government and civil society to action . 
canada can no longer avoid decisive action with abstention votes at the United Nations , as was done on this year ' s New Agenda resolution calling for an unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear weapon states to commence negotiations on the elimination of nuclear weapons . 
like the Kosovo War , nuclear weapons are about the rule of law . 
how will international law be imposed in the years ahead ? 
will it be by the militarily powerful determining what the law should be , or by a collective world effort reposing the seat of law in the United Nations system ? 
that is the fundamental question Canada faces as we begin the new millennium . 
honourable senators , although the facts I presented are grim , I want to face the new millennium with hope . 
my own hope lies in the blossoming of intelligence about ourselves as a human community in a world that is interconnected in every sphere of activity . 
despite the news of wars , hunger , homelessness and disease affecting millions , the world is , in fact , moving toward a new , more participatory , people - centred way of conducting international affairs . 
the potential power of this movement can create the conditions for a culture of peace . 
it is often said that war is inevitable , is part of our human nature , and that people have been fighting throughout history . 
that is a superficial analysis . 
human beings are not genetically programmed for war . 
there is no inherent biological component of our nature that produces violence . 
UNESCO points out that war begins in our minds ; so , too , must the new idea begin in our minds : that peace is absolutely necessary in a technological age of mass destruction . 
the present pessimism must be lifted by the recognition that war is not inevitable . 
violence , on the scale of what we have seen in Iraq , Bosnia , Rwanda , Somalia , Kosovo and elsewhere , does not emerge inexorably from human interaction . 
because the hatred and incitement to violence fostered by social and economic inequality , combined with a readily available supply of deadly weapons , are so evident , it is essential and urgent to find ways to prevent disputes from turning massively violent . 
the real problem here is not that we do not know about incipient and large - scale violence ; it is that we often do not know how to act . 
either we ignore mass killings if the area concerned is not central to our interests , or , as in the case of Kosovo , we unleash a rain of destruction in the name of saving humanity . 
examples from hot spots around the world illustrate that the potential for violence can be diffused through the early , skillful and integrated application of political , diplomatic , economic and military measures . 
although terrible suffering occurred , it is a fact that warring parties have put down their arms in El Salvador , Namibia , Mozambique , South Africa , Guatemala and the Philippines . 
the peace accords in Northern Ireland and the Middle East , though precarious , illustrate that the human desire for peace can overcome histories of conflict . 
since 1945 , the UN has actually negotiated 172 peaceful settlements that have ended regional conflicts , including an end to the war between Iran and Iraq and a withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan . 
war and mass violence usually result from deliberate political decisions . 
rather than intervening in violent conflicts after they have erupted and then engaging in post - conflict peace - building , it is more humane and efficient to prevent such violence in the first place by addressing its roots . 
that is the essence of a " culture of peace " approach . 
the continuing work of UNESCO in promoting knowledge of a culture of peace is inspiring . 
responding to a request by the UN General Assembly to develop the concept of a culture of peace as an integral approach to preventing violence and armed conflicts , UNESCO succeeded in defining norms , values , and aims of peace . 
( 1510 ) 
a culture of peace is the set of values , attitudes , traditions , modes of behaviour , and ways of life that reflect and inspire respect for life and for all human rights . 
it involves the rejection of violence in all its forms , and commitment to the prevention of violent conflicts by tackling their root causes through dialogue and negotiation . 
a peace consciousness does not appear overnight . 
instead of planning to fight wars , Canada should put its full strength behind the efforts of UN Secretary - General Kofi Annan , who recently stressed the need for a culture of peace in these words : 
it may seem sometimes as if a culture of peace does not stand a chance against the culture of war , the culture of violence and the cultures of impunity and intolerance . 
peace may indeed be a complex challenge , dependent on action in many fields and even a bit of luck from time to time . 
it may be a painfully slow process , and fragile and imperfect when it is achieved . 
honourable senators , these ideas were powerfully expressed at the 1999 Hague Appeal for Peace last May , where 7,000 people of 100 nationalities gathered for a four - day jamboree of seminars , exhibits , concerts , and a general outpouring of human yearning for peace . 
to build a culture for peace , Canada must develop and extend policies that promote human security , new coalitions and negotiations , the rule of law , initiatives at peacemaking , democratic decision - making , and humanitarian intervention mandated by the Security Council . 
finally , there must be a reversal of present global policies in which billions of dollars are spent on arms and militarization while worthwhile development initiatives and programs for peace and human security are starved for lack of funds . 
honourable senators , a culture of peace is not only possible , it is essential . 
without the vision of a culture of peace , millions upon millions will perish in the dangerous era ahead . 
can Canada work to ensure the primacy of the United Nations in resolving conflict ? 
we can and we must . 
can Canada work with like - minded states to urge the nuclear - weapons countries to start comprehensive negotiations to eliminate nuclear weapons ? 
we can and we must . 
the principal mandate of the United Nations - to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war - should be a central concern to the Government of Canada . 
the vision of a culture of peace can give us renewed strength as we enter the new millennium . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , would Senator Roche entertain a question ? 
senator Roche : 
certainly . 
senator Grafstein : 
senator Roche and I have dealt with this matter in the past . 
however , I am always interested in what the honourable senator has to say , particularly about the role of the United Nations . 
in recent days , the Secretary - General has condemned the United Nations for its failure with respect to Srebrenica . 
a number of other observers have said the same thing , that the United Nations failed in light of what went on in Srebrenica . 
just to recount it briefly , the United Nations established a safe haven in Srebrenica , only to watch innocent victims who had fled to the white flag of the United Nations be slaughtered there . 
secretary - General Annan has said that that was a failure of the United Nations . 
how does one reconcile the honourable senator ' s views with respect to the role of the United Nations as a generic and peace - loving umbrella when , once it is confronted with evil and stands to oppose it , it finds itself frustrated , impotent and hopeless ? 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable Senator Roche , I am sorry to interrupt you but I must remind you that the time allocated for your intervention is terminated . 
are you asking permission to continue ? 
senator Roche : 
yes , I ask permission to continue . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Roche : 
thank you , honourable senators . 
senator Grafstein has given a pretty tough critique of the United Nations . 
i hope he will not mind my saying that it was less than complete . 
i never said it was a perfect institution , any more than I would say the Government of Canada is a perfect institution . 
however , it is certainly eminently worth supporting the policies that try to build conditions for peace , and that is exactly what the United Nations has been trying to do . 
i will only give one example . 
the Government of Canada has supported the building of a permanent police force to be mobilized in situations of conflict to save lives . 
because of the opposition of the major powers , the United Nations has not yet accepted nor implemented such a force . 
i believe that , as we move into the next century , we should restore the primacy of the United Nations and not allow regional associations , even if they are important associations such as NATO , to supersede the authority of the United Nations as the prime legal guarantee of peace and security in the world . 
that is where we ought to keep our focus . 
on motion of Senator Atkins , debate adjourned . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
second Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders ( Moravian Church in America ) , presented in the Senate on November 24 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Austin , P . C . ) 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
third Report of Committee - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
consideration of the third report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders ( Senator Kinsella ' s Question of Privilege ) , presented in the Senate on November 24 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Austin , P . C . ) 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , with leave , I would like to give a short explanation and not move the adoption of the report at this time . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I am concerned about the availability of full and corroborative evidence in this matter . 
the matter may , however , be settled if the witnesses are prepared to proceed in public , as opposed to in camera . 
i am making inquiries to that effect and , rather than have a discussion about a definition of when in camera should be applied by the house , I should prefer to have this item stand until tomorrow . 
( 1520 ) 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I would like to ask that the chairman of the committee take into consideration , as he is looking at other information , the fact that many of us are of the view that , as a general principle , all proceedings in the Parliament of Canada should be open to the public . 
from time to time , we recognize that there are certain matters which arise which should be dealt with in camera . 
indeed , the consideration by a committee of a draft report is one such instance . 
therefore , I urge the committee to discuss it in public and not in camera . 
to the extent that this particular question of privilege surrounds circumstances in which a job action was undertaken , and that perhaps there are concerns to that extent in the minds of the chair and members of the committee , I remind honourable senators that , under labour law , arbitration matters are not held in camera but , indeed , in public . 
finally , to the extent that I am the member of this house who raised the question of privilege and to the extent that the committee would want my participation , I would find it very difficult to appear before the committee in camera . 
that is a principle under which I operate . 
i would urge the committee to consider all these matters . 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I recognize the principles to which Senator Kinsella has just spoken . 
i believe the onus is on the chairman of the committee to show this chamber why an in camera proceeding should be held . 
order stands . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 14 
Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 
the Honourable Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Speaker pro tempore 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
world AIDS Day 
the Francophonie 
RCMP Inspector Robert Upshaw 
tribute on Promotion 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Presentation of Petition 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Estimates 
national Finance 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
cost Overruns in Capital Expenditures on Embassies Abroad 
human Resources Development 
appropriate Level of Reserve in Employment Insurance Fund 
treasury Board 
auditor General ' s Report - Awarding of Sole - source Contracts - Establishment of Mandatory Contract Review Mechanism 
finance 
auditor General ' s Report - Problems of Underestimating Budget Surplus 
national Defence 
auditor General ' s Report - Implementation of Defence Ethics Program 
heritage 
delay in Building New War Museum - Protection of Archived Art Treasures 
new War Museum - Nature of Private Financing 
business of the Senate 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
justice 
possibility of Further Assistance to Protect People Against Violence 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Motion in Amendment - point of order - Debate Adjourned to Await Speaker ' s Ruling 
motion in Amendment 
point of order 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
motion to Authorize Committee to Review Canadian Environmental Protection Act - Debate Adjourned 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
committee Authorized to Study Matters Related to Mandate 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel - Debate Adjourned 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker pro tempore in the Chair . 
prayers . 
world AIDS Day 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I rise today to observe World AIDS Day . 
at least 190 countries recognize this day , which draws attention to a disease that is affecting people from every corner of the globe . 
world AIDS Day is intended to raise awareness and increase funding so that we can finally put an end to this horrifying epidemic . 
long gone is the notion that AIDS is a homosexual disease . 
this deadly , contagious killer is attacking every segment of our society , without preference or prejudice on the basis of race , sex , social or economic status . 
un AIDS , the United Nations agency studying the disease and working to put an end to the spread of the virus , recently released a report outlining the terrible threat that this epidemic poses to the entire world . 
a reported 5.6 million people will be infected this year alone , bringing the global total to 33.6 million individual human beings . 
with an approximate 10 per cent increase in its incidence this year compared to last , AIDS continues to spread like wildfire . 
the spread of HIV through injection drug use has become an urgent problem . 
it is time for Canada to take a public health approach , such as those endorsed by Britain , the Netherlands , Australia , and Switzerland , which give drug users access to different models of treatment , not only the one that promotes abstention , and which also increase the funding for treatment centres . 
the twelfth annual World AIDS Day is targeted at the youth of the world . 
this year ' s theme is " Children and Young People : 
listen , Learn , Live " . 
this is timely , considering that , according to the UN report , the majority of AIDS victims contract the virus before they are 25 and do not live to see their thirty - fifth birthday . 
it is believed that reaching out to the youth of the world is the most promising approach for reducing the spread of the HIV virus . 
today , 20 years after the epidemic first hit , UN AIDS believes that the worst is yet to come unless greater efforts are made to eradicate this disease . 
as we look forward to the new millennium , we must focus our efforts on education , prevention , improved health care , and , finally and hopefully , a cure . 
if we are to be successful in putting an end to this painful epidemic , we need to call on the leaders of the world to combine their efforts . 
only by working together can we hope to achieve success . 
the Francophonie 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , the Francophonie spoke out clearly on the protection of cultural diversity . 
meeting in Paris on November 30 , 1999 , the Francophone Ministerial Conference , chaired by the Honourable Ronald Duhamel , the Canadian Secretary of State for the Francophonie , reiterated the principle expressed at the Moncton summit , namely that : 
cultural goods absolutely must not be reduced to their mere economic and market value , and countries and governments have the right to freely establish their own cultural policy . 
the Secretary - General of the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie , Boutros Boutros - Ghali , has said that francophone countries cannot accept rules that would diminish national identities . 
the international francophone community is very attached to the basic principle of cultural diversity and multilingualism because they represent its philosophical base and the reason for its existence . 
as you know , honourable senators , in the report on Canada ' s foreign policy entitled " Principles and Priorities for the Future " , tabled five years ago , the joint committee of the House and the Senate clearly established , in chapter 6 : 
the committee clearly recognized that Canada ' s foreign policy on cultural , scientific and educational matters was an integral part , with the provinces ' involvement , of the implementation of national policy . 
each country has a cultural identity of its own , and this uniqueness deserves special treatment . 
canada must reaffirm our position in order to forge alliances to ensure recognition of the need to protect and promote national cultural identities . 
[ English ] 
RCMP Inspector Robert Upshaw 
tribute on Promotion 
leave having been given to revert to Senators ' Statements : 
hon. Calvin Woodrow Ruck : 
the word on the street is that he is the first black man to be appointed to such a high rank in the RCMP . 
we are extremely proud of our brother Robert Upshaw and wish him the best as he carries on his work and influences other young people to aspire to such roles as serving in the honourable tradition of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Presentation of Petition 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Estimates 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , December 2 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee present its report no later than March 31 , 2000 . 
national Finance 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , December 2 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , December 2 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of the Committee ' s examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
question PERIOD 
foreign Affairs 
cost Overruns in Capital Expenditures on Embassies Abroad 
hon. Terry Stratton : 
honourable senators , my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate has to do with a question I asked last week about Foreign Affairs having spent 50 per cent more than its original estimate in the Main Estimates . 
it is up to $ 130 million now for capital construction , $ 70 million of which has been allocated for the German embassy , owing to the relocation of the nation ' s capital from Bonn to Berlin . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
shame ! 
senator Stratton : 
these questions were also asked when the Finance Committee was looking at the Supplementary Estimates . 
i asked Officials from the Treasury Board why the costs had escalated by 50 per cent and if they could give me a breakdown . 
the Treasury Board officials said they would get back to me , and the Honourable Leader of the Government in the Senate said he would get back to me . 
i must give credit to the Honourable Senator Hays , who has been fairly quick in responding to our questions . 
i guess he has more staff , because Senator Carstairs would take longer . 
an Hon. Senator : 
he is from Alberta . 
senator Stratton : 
an Albertan more efficient than a Manitoban ? 
i do not think so . 
two questions were asked - one in a Finance Committee meeting and one in this chamber last week . 
they are fairly simple questions . 
as it happened , I found the answers on page five of The Ottawa Citizen this morning . 
perhaps the Leader of the Government in the Senate should be asking me for the answers to these questions . 
i could advise him that in Seoul , Korea , there is a $ 22 - million overrun . 
not only that , but the $ 22 - million overrun may have cancelled the project . 
they bought a piece of land for $ 15 million five years ago . 
the land is vacant . 
if you use the Finance Minister ' s method of calculating interest on the opportunity cost of $ 15 million over five years , you get $ 8 million in lost opportunity costs of that $ 15 million . 
then there is the New Delhi residence in India , which is $ 200,000 over budget . 
senator Di Nino : 
that is a lot of money in India . 
senator Stratton : 
what in the world is going on in Foreign Affairs that they cannot control costs ? 
i can understand being in a country where you do not know the local construction trades , but this is nothing new to Foreign Affairs . 
they have been doing this kind of thing for years . 
surely to goodness they can have a better control on costs than this kind of nonsense where the costs escalate by 50 per cent over the original estimate . 
it is a travesty that we have a project in Seoul with a $ 22 - million overrun , and they have cancelled it so that the land is sitting vacant . 
perhaps the Leader of the Government would care to respond . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for his remarks . 
senator Prud ' homme : 
answer the speech , please . 
senator Boudreau : 
to some extent , I share his disappointment that the Deputy Leader of the Government was not quicker in responding with that particular answer . 
however , I also agree that , in general , he has responded quickly , and I thank him for that . 
with respect to the individual issues that the honourable senator brings forward , obviously we attempt to get the best value with regard to all construction , relying on the local resources in the country . 
judging from the information that the honourable senator shared with us , those local resources have been somewhat unpredictable as we have followed through on these projects . 
i will attempt to obtain more specific information to address the honourable senators ' s concerns . 
the honourable senator raises concerns with respect to the vacant land . 
one can only hope that the vacant land has tripled in value so that not only can we avoid an opportunity loss , but perhaps we can even make a gain . 
senator Stratton : 
i think we owe something to this chamber and to the people of Canada . 
we have these outrageous overruns . 
how are you addressing this problem ? 
how will you prevent it in the future ? 
senator Boudreau : 
the honourable senator raises an important issue . 
i indicated that I would provide the honourable senator with reassurance from the minister that these issues will be reviewed and , hopefully , that measures will be instituted to avoid a repetition . 
human Resources Development 
appropriate Level of Reserve in Employment Insurance Fund 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , taking a leaf from Senator Stratton ' s book , I , too , have a bit of a preamble to my question . 
in his November 19 , 1999 report , the Auditor General raises the question of employment insurance surplus . 
the EI premium rate is set by the EI Commission , which is composed by representatives from the employees , the employers and the government , and must be approved by cabinet on the recommendation of the Human Resources Development and Finance Ministers . 
they are supposed to act with a view to creating a rate that will cover program costs while being relatively stable over a business cycle . 
they are allowed to establish an appropriate level of reserves but with no direction in law as to what is appropriate . 
the Auditor General , in a letter to the Human Resources Development Minister last July , pointed out that the EI surplus is now above the $ 10 billion to $ 15 billion level that the EI actuary considers adequate to meet the requirements of the act . 
he told the minister that , since the surplus was above the level determined by the plan ' s actuary to be sufficient , then : 
in view of the current level of the surplus , clarification and disclosure of the factors to be used in determining an appropriate level of reserve are necessary . 
the government ' s response to the Auditor General is to simply outline the process by which rates are set , with no response to the specific suggestion that the government disclose the factors to be used in determining an appropriate level of reserves . 
honourable senators , by the end of March the EI surplus will be above $ 26 billion . 
some time in the next fiscal year it will surpass $ 30 billion . 
if so , what is the number and how was that particular number determined ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as the honourable senator knows , there is a very healthy surplus in the Employment Insurance Fund . 
as an aside , the healthy surplus is one of the results of a healthy economy , which is what we have at the moment . 
one of the results of a thriving economy is that the demands on the employment insurance regime are not as heavy as they might be under other circumstances , and this is a reason for all of us to be very pleased . 
in the face of this growth , employment insurance premiums have been reduced significantly over the last number of years . 
i do not have the figures in front of me but I can easily produce them , and I am sure that the honourable senator is aware that there has been a stage reduction . 
it is argued by some that that stage reduction has not taken place quickly enough , or that there should be further reductions now . 
the Employment Insurance Commission , which sets the rates , has taken a somewhat different view . 
i believe they are acting , if I may say this , conservatively . 
however , we should give some credit to both the government and the economy for presenting us with this interesting challenge . 
senator Oliver : 
the honourable minister has , perhaps , pre - empted the Minister of Finance and given us an economic forecast . 
however , my specific question dealt with the issue of reserves in the fund . 
if we have $ 26 billion now and in the next fiscal year we will have $ 30 billion , when is enough enough ? 
what does the minister consider to be an adequate reserve ? 
when can employers look forward to some relief ? 
senator Di Nino : 
real relief ! 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , employers can look forward to ongoing relief , as they have in the past number of years . 
the federal government has provided consistent relief as the programs have moved forward . 
what is an appropriate level of reserve ? 
i cannot provide a specific answer to the honourable senator ' s question . 
it may depend on the economy at a given point in time . 
other factors may be brought to bear . 
one would certainly wish to err on the side of caution in any event . 
i cannot give a personal view as to what the appropriate level should be . 
it is safe to believe that if the surpluses continue to grow , the government may very well consider further reductions . 
treasury Board 
auditor General ' s Report - Awarding of Sole - source Contracts - Establishment of Mandatory Contract Review Mechanism 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , the Auditor General , in his November 1999 report , specifically in Chapter 30 , " Sole - sourced Contracting for Professional Services " , took a close look at the government ' s practice of awarding sole - source contracts for professional services . 
these are contracts where the competitive process is bypassed in favour of a particular contractor . 
he also looked at the mechanism known as an Advance Contract Award Notice , or ACAN . 
honourable senators , contracts are supposed to be let through a competitive process ; however , the rules are being bypassed in order to select a particular contractor . 
as the Auditor General reported : 
the process of awarding most of the contracts audited in this year ' s sample would not pass the test of public scrutiny . 
the figure is startling . 
the Auditor General found that nearly 90 per cent of the consulting contracts audited were improperly awarded . 
honourable senators , counting just those contracts that exceed $ 25,000 , sole - source contracts now represent some $ 1.3 billion of government spending . 
yet it is not at all clear what services are being provided . 
as well , the amount of work proposed by the contractor is seldom examined critically , and the ACAN posting rules are not followed properly . 
in addition , only a small number complied with the government contract regulation for justifying sole sourcing . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I think all of us would agree that under general circumstances the sole - source contract is not the most appropriate way to proceed . 
however , there are circumstances , as the honourable senator is aware , when a sole - source contract might be appropriate . 
in this case , the Auditor General has given his view with respect to a number of selected contracts . 
i believe that he reviewed these contracts in some detail and felt that the appropriate guidelines were not observed in every case . 
i am confident that the minister involved will welcome the constructive comments of the Auditor General , and I expect that he will take them into account and act accordingly . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , $ 1.3 billion or 90 per cent is hardly " some " . 
that is a new definition of " some " , I must say . 
honourable senators , I will quote from the Auditor General again when he said : 
expanding on the permitted exceptions , or ignoring them , represents an unwarranted decision by individual officials to alter the balance of values the government has established to guide the conduct of its affairs . 
may I remind you , honourable senators , that in spite of the fact that the 1993 Red Book promised to cut spending on professional and special services , this government has vastly increased its contracting out . 
as a matter of fact , on This Hour Has 22 Minutes last week the comment was made that the Red Book should have won the Governor General ' s award in the fiction category . 
are they trying to protect their own power and influence over the recipients of these sole - source contracts ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the government , insofar as its Red Book is concerned , will be judged by the people of this country when the appropriate time arises . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
you will be there . 
senator Boudreau : 
i may be there . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
no , you will be there and , honourable senator , you will wish you were here . 
we will be there , too . 
senator Graham : 
will you be there ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i will be there . 
Halifax Centre . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I understand more people may be seeking a nomination . 
it is an example I am not sure I would recommend . 
getting back to the question , I believe that the government will be judged by Canadians on its overall performance with respect to the Red Book promises . 
i do not think there is any rationale in the government to award contracts in any way other than in the best interests of the people of the country . 
the minister will take seriously the comments made by the Auditor General . 
senator LeBreton : 
if contracts are issued in the interests of the public , there is no reason that we should not know about them . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator has clearly expressed her concerns . 
it is recognized , by every government that has been in office , that there are certain instances in which contracts must be awarded other than through the normal tendering system . 
finance 
auditor General ' s Report - Problems of Underestimating Budget Surplus 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , my question is addressed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the Auditor General has pointed out a flaw in the government ' s policy of continuing to use overly prudent assumptions of economic growth and interest rates . 
he says that this approach was useful when there was a deficit in assuring financial markets that things were under control , but in times of surplus it biases the government toward heavy spending toward the end of the fiscal year . 
the Auditor General says that since , with prudent forecasting , the surplus will likely be more than forecast : 
by the time this becomes evident near the year end it is normally too late to affect the result through tax reductions , leaving increased spending as the most effective means of eliminating the excessive surplus . 
each of the past two budgets contained significant new spending booked in the year the budget was tabled . 
honourable senators , the Auditor General goes on to say that this differs from the year - end spending that goes on in departments only in the sense that it involves billions rather than millions of taxpayer dollars . 
has the time not come for the government to rethink its approach of booking huge amounts of year - end spending for no reason other than to manipulate the size of the reported surplus or deficit ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have read some of the comments to which the honourable senator refers . 
it has been a concern of the Auditor General that surpluses are being underestimated by government for one reason or another . 
one can ascribe whatever motives one chooses . 
upon hearing those remarks , I marvel at how times have changed . 
i can remember well when the criticism of the Auditor General , year after year , was that the government had overestimated revenues , blown the picture out of proportion , severely underestimated deficits and , as a result , fundamentally misled people . 
that was the practice in some jurisdictions , and it was a very dangerous practice . 
perhaps it is a fault from an accounting or management point of view to be too cautious in predicting surpluses . 
if so , it is one with which we can live more easily than the other extreme , which was the case for so long in this country . 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government is using the same tack as his colleague the Minister of Finance . 
obviously , this year ' s budget surplus will be greater than what was announced in February 1999 . Instead of keeping these funds , why does the government not lower taxes immediately , since it knows there will be a surplus ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , projections have been made by various distinguished organizations and institutions in our country on how the economy will perform over a multi - year time frame and what the surpluses are likely to be over that same time frame . 
it has been popular to forecast surpluses for the next five years . 
i agree with the Minister of Finance that , while such projections are useful for certain planning purposes , in terms of budgeting and planning government programs the time frame should be much shorter . 
realistically , a two - year time frame may be pushing the limit of what you can reasonably deal with in terms of budget and program planning . 
i do , however , agree that if we are too cautious and there is a larger surplus than forecast , then it may not come into play immediately . 
national Defence 
auditor General ' s Report - Implementation of Defence Ethics Program 
hon. Michael A . Meighen : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
during the spring of 1998 , the government in its advocacy of Bill C - 25 , the act to amend the National Defence Act , told Canadians that all recommendations pertaining to the Somalia inquiry had been implemented . 
yet , the Auditor General states , in the part of the report relating to National Defence , first and foremost , that the defence ethics program has not yet been fully implemented . 
this program was a cornerstone of the government ' s Somalia inquiry . 
will the Leader of the Government acknowledge that the recommendations of that inquiry have not yet been fully implemented and indicate when we might expect them to be ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the minister and the department are working on the measure to which the honourable senator refers . 
the Auditor General ' s criticism was that it was not functioning as he thought it should . 
that is a valuable comment and is one which the minister will take seriously in his attempts to speed up the implementation and make it more fulsome . 
senator Meighen : 
honourable senators , I look forward to an early report that the program has been completed . 
heritage 
delay in Building New War Museum - Protection of Archived Art Treasures 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
yesterday I asked the leader whether the government was seriously committed to the development of a new war museum . 
is the government aware that Vimy House , which is bursting at the seams , is also subject to leaking roofs and poor ventilation and climate control , and that this endangers over 12,000 pieces of art , some of great value ? 
however , I recommend that he and all members of the Senate visit Vimy House . 
what is the government doing to ensure that these national treasures are protected while it decides whether to finance a new Canadian War Museum ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I wish to give the honourable senator my personal undertaking that before the Senate resumes sitting in the new year , I will have visited Vimy House . 
the matter that the honourable senator raises is a serious one . 
as he points out , it is not one with which I am familiar . 
however , I will certainly make some inquiries and undertake a personal tour . 
new War Museum - Nature of Private Financing 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , my question concerns a comment on a similar subject made yesterday by the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
it had to do with the comment on the necessity of private financing for the construction of the new Canadian War Museum . 
what kind of private financing was the minister talking about ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I was referring to the possibility of a private fundraising campaign to which the Canadian public would be asked to contribute . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , will that be undertaken by the Liberal Party of Canada , the Government of Canada , the veterans or , perhaps , people who profited from the war such as Winchester and Jeep ? 
perhaps the minister could inform us as to how this will happen . 
i find it shameful that we are even talking about this matter . 
i know that members opposite do not have any shame when it comes to discussing matters like this . 
what we are really talking about is not having money to fund a new war museum , yet we spend money for other things , including $ 1.3 million for contracts given to Grits across the country . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I take it that some portions of the honourable senator ' s question were not entirely serious in their content . 
we have a distinguished Canadian and a distinguished veteran who is directly involved , the Honourable Barney Danson , and his committee . 
i can presume that any effort to seek money from the Canadian public in support of this endeavour would necessarily involve someone such as himself . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , when Mr. Danson is asked how much money the Government of Canada has committed to it , what will he tell them ? 
senator Boudreau : 
business of the Senate 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , the time allowed for Question Period is up . 
is there leave to continue , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
your Honour has risen regarding an extension of time for Question Period . 
with regard to extending Question Period on Wednesday , I believe it should be our practice not to give leave . 
we should limit it to the time provided to ensure that we adjourn , as we intend to on Wednesdays , in time for committees to continue important work when the Senate rises , hopefully , at 3:30 p.m. 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 16 , 1999 by the Honourable Senator Sparrow regarding the possibility of further assistance to protect people against violence . 
justice 
possibility of Further Assistance to Protect People Against Violence 
( response to question raised by Hon. Herbert O . Sparrow on November 16 , 1999 ) 
a number of provincial jurisdictions have identified home invasions as an area of concern . 
this type of criminal conduct is of a serious nature and instils fear in members of the public , particularly the elderly . 
recent media stories about incidents in Vancouver , British Columbia have focused attention on this type of criminal conduct . 
the International Centre for the Prevention of Crime , based in Montr é al , has defined home invasions as " a residential break and enter combined with the offence of robbery , that is , the theft of property via the threat and / or use of violence ( at any time during the commission of the offence ) or the use of an offensive weapon or an imitation weapon . 
such offences against residential premises occur when the residents are home , and offender objectives include the theft of property , money , and illicit drugs . " 
in a report entitled " Canadian Crime Statistics , 1996 , " the Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics ( CCJS ) reported on the rate of incidence of home invasions . 
CCJS also publishes reports on overall criminal justice trends . 
in 1998 , robberies decreased for a second consecutive year , with a 3 per cent decline , breaking and entering decreased by 7 per cent , and the rate of violent crime declined by 2 per cent , the sixth consecutive year of decline . 
at the February 25 - 26 , 1999 meeting of Federal / Provincial / Territorial Deputy Ministers Responsible for Justice it was agreed that the matter of home invasions would be referred to senior officials for the development of potential legislative and non - legislative options to address home invasions . 
an options paper is presently under development . 
the National Crime Prevention Centre has commissioned a paper from the International Centre for the Prevention of Crime on " Effective Actions to Reduce and Prevent Residential Burglary and Home Invasion " which would assess the extent and magnitude of home invasions both nationally and internationally and discuss risk factors and prevention best practices . 
this paper should be of assistance in the development of non - legislative , crime prevention strategies to address home invasions . 
under existing Criminal Code provisions , offenders convicted of robbery or break and enter of a dwelling house are subject to a maximum sentence of imprisonment for life . 
this maximum is a reflection that Parliament considers these offences to be of a very serious nature . 
where a firearm is utilized in the commission of a robbery , a mandatory minimum punishment of imprisonment for four years will be imposed . 
recent court decisions addressing home invasions reflect these sentencing principles and objectives . 
courts have been imposing stiff sentences for this type of crime . 
in R . v. Matwiy ( 1996 ) , 105 C . C . C . ( 3 d ) 251 , a decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal involving an offender who had committed a home invasion robbery , the Court stated that " offences which strike at the right of members of the public to the security of their own homes and to freedom from intrusion therein , must be treated with the utmost seriousness . " 
the Court observed that the Supreme Court of Canada has also recognized the sanctity of a person ' s residence and described this concept as one of the principles of the common law which has been in place since 1604 . 
a number of Alberta court decisions have held that the starting point for sentences for home invasions should be eight years and that this offence warrants a higher starting point sentence than the offence of armed robbery of a bank or of a commercial institution . 
in a recent British Columbia Supreme Court decision , R . v. Bernier , the offender who was a party to a home invasion was sentenced to fourteen years in prison . 
Bouck J . was reported as stating that " before the increased scourge of home invasions began to appear , the British Columbia Court of Appeal had set a range of four to nine years where robbery with a weapon was part of breaking and entering " but that " the situation is so urgent that I must depart from the standard range . 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Stollery , seconded by the Honourable Senator Hays , for the second reading of Bill C - 4 , to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts . 
hon. William M. Kelly : 
honourable senators , I am pleased today to have the opportunity to speak to Bill C - 4 . 
first , however , I wish to congratulate Senator Stollery for his competent and clear presentation of this bill . 
bill C - 4 is required to provide the legislative base for Canada to meet its obligations under the Agreement Concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station . 
as I understand it , the United States ratified the agreement in April 1998 . Japan ratified it in November 1998 . Germany and Norway have ratified the agreement already . 
canada , the United Kingdom and other European countries have their ratification process underway with the objective of full ratification of the agreement by January 29 , 2000 . 
only for Russia , consumed as it is by internal economic and political issues , is ratification not at the moment imminent . 
as we all know , the making of international agreements in our system is the prerogative of the Crown . 
parliament ' s approval is not required for the agreement per se ; however , it is required to bring certain aspects of Canadian law into line with the agreement . 
given that it relates to an international agreement that has major implications for Canada in the economic , research and technology fields , and also given that the agreement goes into uncharted territory on several aspects , I suggest that Parliament might have been given more time to examine the bill , the agreement and their implications . 
i trust and hope that these matters will be carefully reviewed in committee - at least , I hope they will be more carefully examined and reviewed than they were in the other place . 
notwithstanding that situation , I believe that we should support enthusiastically principles of this bill . 
the legislation is necessary for Canada to assume its role as one of the partners in one of the largest scientific projects in history , namely , the international space station . 
honourable senators , although Canada ' s participation in the space station has been evaluated at around 2.5 per cent of the total cost , our role is to provide the mobile servicing system , or MSS , which will be a critically important part . 
as I understand it , the MSS will be used to assemble the space station and to maintain it throughout its lifetime . 
the MSS consists of equipment and facilities to be located both on the space station and on the ground . 
the on - station elements will include the space station remote manipulator system , which is a sophisticated space arm , and its mobile remote servicer base system . 
canada will also be providing the special purpose dextrous manipulator , which is a twin - armed robot . 
the Canadarm and the space station remote manipulator system will both be used for the assembly and maintenance of the space station during its projected 10 - year life . 
the ground facilities Canada will provide would include an MSS operations complex located at the Canadian Space Agency ' s headquarters in Saint - Hubert , Quebec . 
the Canadian Space Agency has been an important catalyst for Canada ' s participation in the industry . 
canada ' s space industry has become a major contributor to the Canadian economy . 
as Senator Stollery noted , it generates over $ 1 billion in annual revenues , of which 30 per cent are exports . 
it generates over 5,000 jobs in more than 250 companies across Canada . 
it is an industry in which Canada ' s private sector has shouldered a strong role . 
the private sector invests approximately $ 1 million annually in R & D efforts relating to space projects . 
canada ' s participation in the international space station project is forecast to cost $ 1.4 billion , with a return on investment of over $ 6 billion and some 70,000 person years of employment across Canada . 
the ISS will help advance us in telecommunications , especially in wireless telecommunications that are so important to Canada because of our geographic expanse and our many remote pockets of civilization . 
the ISS will advance earth observation technology , a $ 2 - billion and growing industry annually in which Canada has already established leadership through Radarsat . 
notwithstanding the importance of the space industry to the Canadian economy , in particular to the growth of the next - generation economy , government funding to the Canadian Space Agency has declined from $ 378 million in fiscal 1993 - 94 to $ 350 million in the current fiscal year . 
i must say , honourable senators , that I hope this is not a signal of something that I sense happens from time to time . 
we tend to make agreements , commit ourselves to very important projects and then gradually dwindle down what was originally envisaged as being our contribution . 
i hope this decrease in spending is not a sign of that in this case . 
i said earlier that I thought this initiative deserved our enthusiastic support . 
i say that not only because of the short - term economic benefits but for several other reasons as well . 
the ISS has no direct military role or capability . 
for example , it will have no launch capability for satellites or missiles . 
this guarantees the ISS is used for exclusively peaceful purposes . 
the participation of Russia in the international space station is particularly to be supported and encouraged . 
Russia ' s experience with the MIR space station is of enormous benefit to this project . 
the Zvezda service module launched in October by Russia ' s aviation space agency will provide the early living quarters for the space station and control of the station until the arrival of the USS Destiny , sometime early next year . 
Russian Proton and Soyuz rockets are also an important part of the project . 
although the Russian Parliament has not yet begun the process required for Russia to ratify the agreement , I understand that the Russian participation proceeds and will continue to proceed nonetheless . 
from perhaps a more selfish perspective , Canada ' s contribution of the MSS gives us the right to use the station for scientific and technological research . 
under Article 21 of the agreement , the results of all research conducted by each of the partners will be the intellectual property of the partner doing the research . 
to ensure that Canada gets all it can out of this unprecedented opportunity , the Canadian Space Agency has established a micro - gravity science program to give Canadian researchers experience in designing and conducting experiments and equipment for space . 
the micro - gravity science program also provides funding for training and equipment development needed to conduct research in the space station . 
as a result , Canada will have a research and industrial capacity to utilize the space station to the full extent of its research and scientific capacity . 
finally , honourable senators , 40 years ago a young American president challenged us to explore the new frontier of space . 
when he did , the world lived in the shadow of the Cold War , in constant fear that earthly competition between the two superpowers would boil over into nuclear conflagration . 
president Kennedy saw the space race as just that , a race to obtain economic , scientific , military and ideological supremacy of one superpower over another . 
how far we have come ! 
in a century that began with terrestrial flight in its infancy , we have put man on the moon . 
we have sent probes to the outer reaches of space . 
we will soon place a microphone that will allow us to hear the sounds of Mars for the first time . 
we no longer stand on a new frontier , as President Kennedy said . 
we have now occupied that frontier and stand to reap its manifold benefits . 
however , most important of all , through initiatives such as the international space station , and through a host of international agreements dealing with space , our occupation is not territorial , but is for the purpose of learning and of science to benefit all mankind . 
our occupation is not with instruments of war , but with instruments of peace . 
honourable senators , in that spirit , I commend Bill C - 4 to your consideration . 
i will be anxious to participate both at committee and during third reading , if necessary . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if there is no other honourable senator who wishes to speak , it was moved by the Honourable Senator Hays , seconded by the Honourable Senator Moore , that this bill be read a second time . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read a third time ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Motion in Amendment - point of order - Debate Adjourned to Await Speaker ' s Ruling 
on the Order : 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to Bill S - 7 . 
i had spoken to this bill ' s identical predecessor , Bill S - 15 , on June 9 , 1998 . 
honourable senators , I believe in Canada ' s Constitution , constitutional monarchy , its institutions and Her Majesty , Queen Elizabeth II. 
in this Senate , I took the Oath of Allegiance to Her Majesty . 
it is my sworn duty to uphold Her Majesty ' s rights and interests as the third constituent element of the Parliament of Canada . 
the Constitution Act , 1867 , section 17 states : 
there shall be One Parliament for Canada , consisting of the Queen , an Upper House styled the Senate , and the House of Commons . 
honourable senators , I thank the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton for this timely debate , more so with the outcome of the Australian referendum on the monarchy . 
on November 6 , 1999 , Australians voted 55 per cent to 45 per cent to maintain Queen Elizabeth II as their monarch . 
bill S - 7 is about Her Majesty ' s Royal Prerogative in respect to her Royal Assent to bills that have been passed by the Senate and the House of Commons . 
its subject is this Royal Assent , which gives passed bills the force of law . 
bill S - 7 poses an important and pressing constitutional question . 
how can Royal Assent , the very action which gives a bill the force of law , itself become the subject of a bill which must then obtain that same Royal Assent to receive the force of law ? 
honourable senators , the Royal Prerogative is the foundation of ministerial cabinet government and makes responsible government possible . 
the Royal Prerogative is so pivotal that the 1931 Statute of Westminster declared that any United Kingdom ' s alterations to the royal succession , style and titles must be agreed to by the Parliaments of the Dominions , of which Canada was one . 
the Statute of Westminster stated in part : 
and whereas it is meet and proper to set out by way of preamble to this Act that , inasmuch as the Crown is the symbol of the free association of the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations , and as they are united by a common allegiance to the Crown , it would be in accord with the established constitutional position of all the members of the Commonwealth in relation to one another that any alteration in the law touching the Succession to the Throne or the Royal Style and Titles shall hereafter require the assent as well of the Parliaments of all the Dominions as of the Parliament of the United Kingdom : 
honourable senators , in September there were media reports about the outgoing Governor General Rom é o LeBlanc ' s actions on the viceregal crest , its lion and the lion ' s tongue . 
readers of the National Post should be aware of a few facts about the so - called viceregal crest . 
the crest in question is not Rom é o LeBlanc ' s " official crest " as stated , but that of the Royal coat of arms used in Canada , commonly and erroneously referred to as the Canadian coat of arms . 
similarly , this same crest cannot be correctly called a viceregal one because it is part of Her Majesty ' s arms in right of Canada , as borne out in the 1921 proclamation . 
continuing in his next line about another former Governor General ' s action in removing royal insignia at Government House , Mr. Meyer wrote : 
the late Jeanne Sauv é , during her tenure as governor - general , rid Rideau Hall writing paper , flatware and Government House sentry boxes of the crown that had been used since Confederation . 
in its place she substituted what her minions described as the " viceregal lion " , i . e . the crest that is the subject of Mr. LeBlanc ' s dissatisfaction . 
some say that it is a total inconvenience and a nuisance to the House of Commons . 
it is simply too inconvenient for ministers to attend . 
it became too inconvenient for the Prime Minister to attend , then so for the ministers , then for the members , then , too , for the Supreme Court of Canada Justices . 
Humbug ! 
yet honourable senators attend Royal Assent faithfully in this , our own Senate , the House of the Royal Assent . 
honourable senators , I challenge those who assert that the Royal Assent is a mere formality . 
they are wrong . 
i say that their false or wrong assertion cannot by repetition become true or right . 
Benjamin Disraeli , United Kingdom Prime Minister in the late 1800 ' s , in his 1852 book Lord George Bentinck : 
a Political Biography described the true force and meaning of Royal Assent by the Queen . 
he wrote : 
as a branch of the legislature whose decision is final , and therefore last solicited , the opinion of the sovereign remains unshackled and uncompromised until the assent of both houses has been received . 
nor is this veto of the English monarch an empty form . 
it is not difficult to conceive the occasion when , supported by the sympathies of a loyal people , its exercise might defeat an unconstitutional ministry and a corrupt parliament . 
honourable senators , that is the true position , the true constitutional position , of Royal Assent in our constitutional monarchy of ministerial responsibility . 
royal Assent is that parliamentary stage , and the only stage in our parliamentary legislative process , where Parliament as a whole , in its three constituent parts , comes together as the one Parliament of Canada in the enacting process of law - making , transforming measures into statute law . 
the Royal Assent is that quintessential act in our responsible ministerial government system known as the Queen in Parliament - that defining moment in the parliamentary law - making process . 
royal Assent is no mere formality . 
it is the most visible act of the Queen in Canada , which since Confederation has been given in this Senate for sound constitutional reasons . 
senators must protect the visibility of the Queen ' s actual role in Canada ' s Parliament and Constitution . 
the Clerk of the House of Commons is the Under - Clerk of the Parliaments . 
our lady Usher of the Black Rod is the Queen ' s personal messenger , who acts in that relationship between the Queen and the two Houses in the Queen ' s performance of her parliamentary functions . 
the constitutional functions of the whole Parliament of Canada can only be performed in this Senate House . 
the whole parliament assembles here for the Throne Speech , previously the Royal Speech . 
until about 1947 , Canada ' s Governor General held office in the East Block of these buildings . 
until quite recently , the Governor General attended here in this Senate to prorogue and to dissolve Parliament - important parliamentary functions which were exercised visibly until administrative convenience drove prorogation and dissolution to the privacy and invisibility of Government House at Rideau Hall , concealed from public view , knowledge and understanding . 
our country has been systematically deprived - robbed - of the knowledge and view of its own political language , culture and customs as the position of the monarch as the lynchpin has been diminished . 
administrative convenience is no fit ground on which to found the dismantling of vital constitutional practices . 
former prime minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau described the current Quebec nationalist strategy of " creeping independence " , of " é tapisme " , the concept coined by the late Quebec Separatist Premier Ren é L é vesque . 
they want to take this power now , then that power , and eventually Quebecers will feel that they govern more from Quebec than from Ottawa and then they take the last step and do it all . 
this same " é tapisme " or gradualism is working on Canada ' s monarchy : the certain removal of a departmental name here , an insignia there , a custom here and there . 
honourable senators , Senator Lynch - Staunton believes that his proposed alteration to Royal Assent requires a bill . 
he is correct . 
a bill is required for such a fundamental change to Her Majesty ' s and the Senate ' s constitutional order in Canada . 
the good senator proposes to alter Her Majesty ' s Royal Prerogative in respect of her Royal Assent to bills . 
this alteration is a limitation . 
bill S - 7 is a limitation on the exercise of the Royal Prerogative in Royal Assent and , simultaneously , is a limitation on the constitution of the Senate . 
an alteration to the Royal Prerogative of this magnitude can only be undertaken by bill with due regard to constitutional practice , parliamentary law and usage . 
about the Royal Consent , Beauchesne states at paragraph 726 ( 1 ) , 6 th edition that : 
É tapisme , the certain , persistent deletion of the language of the constitutional monarchy of Canada . 
honourable senators , about the stage of proceedings for Royal Consent , Beauchesne paragraph 726 ( 2 ) , 6 th edition states : 
the Royal Consent is generally given at the earliest stage of debate . 
its omission , when it is required , renders the proceedings on the passage of a bill null and void . 
about Royal Consent and second reading , Beauchesne paragraph 727 ( 1 ) , states in part : 
the consent of the Crown is always necessary in matters involving the prerogatives of the Crown . 
this consent may be given at any stage of a bill before final passage ; though in the House it is generally signified on the motion for second reading . 
honourable senators , Her Majesty ' s advisors , government ministers , privy councillors , acting under responsibility , are constitutionally competent to obtain the Royal Consent . 
consequently , during consideration of a bill affecting the Royal Prerogative , they can be expected reliably to signify the Royal Consent . 
however , for a private member the situation is quite different . 
for a private member on the opposition benches , the situation is also interesting . 
if that opposition member ' s bill is supported by the government , then the situation would be constitutionally peculiar , for Her Majesty ' s ministers , her pre - eminent advisors , by declining legislatively and parliamentarily to uphold and defend Her Majesty ' s prerogative , would imperil that very prerogative from which they derive their ministerial authority , power and pre - eminence . 
that could have the makings of a constitutional crisis . 
my point here , however , is private members , and their position in respect of their bills to alter the Royal Prerogative . 
honourable senators , the necessary communication to obtain Her Majesty ' s Royal Consent was confirmed by the fourth report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , introduced in the Senate on November 6 , 1985 . 
i believe that committee was chaired by Senator Gildas Molgat . 
the report ' s recommendation No. 3 said , at page 1469 : 
that representatives of the Senate meet with representatives of the House of Commons to draft a resolution for a joint Address of both Houses to be presented to Her Excellency the Governor General , praying that she approve such changes to the Royal Assent ceremony as described in this Report . 
the operative words are " address " and " praying that she approve " . 
all authorities agree that the House must receive Royal Consent for any bill which alters the Queen ' s Royal Prerogative before it is passed in that House . 
honourable senators , about the position of private members and their obligation to the House on like bills , Alpheus Todd , in the work already cited , wrote that : 
this intimation should be given before the committal of the Bill . 
but where a public bill of this description is proposed to be initiated by a private member , and not upon the responsibility of ministers , the House ought to address the crown for leave to proceed thereon , before the introduction of the same ... 
at no time has he indicated how he intends to proceed to seek and obtain Her Majesty ' s Royal Consent for this house , an absolute prerequisite to Senate consideration and passage of this bill . 
senator Lynch - Staunton has a duty to move an address to Her Majesty the Queen asking her agreement to our consideration of this bill . 
it is on such motion for that address that the public and parliamentary debate will ensue . 
motion in Amendment 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
having said that , honourable senators , I should like to move an amendment to the motion . 
i move : 
that Bill S - 7 be not now read a second time , but be read a second time when its sponsor fulfills the condition required by the law of Parliament that is necessary and preliminary to the passage in Parliament of a private member ' s bill altering the Royal Prerogative , that preliminary condition being the signification of Her Majesty ' s Royal Consent to Parliament ' s consideration of Her Majesty ' s interests in Bill S - 7 ' s proposed limitation and alteration to the manner , form , and style of Her Majesty ' s Royal Assent in Canada , which is simultaneously an alteration to the constitution of the Senate . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I wonder if I may be allowed a question and a comment arising out of the speech made by Senator Cools . 
she referred at one point in her remarks to the staff of the residence or the office of the Governor General as " minions " . 
senator Cools : 
as what ? 
i have never done that . 
senator Corbin : 
you said that . 
our parliamentary practice always prohibited slanderous remarks on the person of the Queen and the Governor General . 
surely , this ought to extend to the house staff of Her Majesty or , indeed , the Governor General . 
i am sure Senator Cools went beyond her thoughts when she used that word . 
it is not for me to tell her or to remind her about the propriety of the use of such terms , but the meaning is clear in the minds of everyone . 
i wonder if Senator Cools would not want to withdraw that word . 
in the same way that we would not wish to use that adjective with respect to our own staff here in the Senate . 
i do not think we should speak of the staff and servants of the residence of the Governor General with that kind of bias . 
senator Cools : 
honourable senators , I should like to thank Senator Corbin for his particular question . 
i should like to point out that his question and his allusion to me is mistaken and very wrong . 
i should like to say very clearly to all here in this chamber that I am probably the greatest supporter in this chamber that the monarch and the Governor General have . 
i should like to make it quite clear that those words were not my words . 
senator Stratton : 
are you demeaning the rest of us ? 
senator Cools : 
if you would like to take the floor , you are quite welcome . 
those words were not my words . 
as I said before , they were the words of a Mr. Rean Meyer , President of the Heraldry Society of Canada , British Columbia Yukon Branch . 
i was reading to honourable senators from a letter that Mr. Meyer wrote to the National Post on September 8 , 1999 . 
should Senator Corbin like a copy of that newspaper article , I would be happy to provide it to him so that he can examine it and see that those words were the words of the author of the letter and not mine . 
i would like to make it crystal clear that I am so strongly committed to the office of the Governor General that I would love to have the Governor General come here every time Royal Assent is required . 
the purpose of my words today are to encourage the Governors General of Canada to exercise their full powers as the personal representative of Her Majesty the Queen . 
this bill has its supporters , as it certainly has its opponents . 
i am told that there are some former governors general who are not entirely happy with some of the proposals in this bill . 
i again thank Senator Lynch - Staunton for bringing forward this debate because Royal Assent is a matter of the constitution of this place . 
when I came to this place , I took an oath to be loyal to Her Majesty and I swear to God that I intend to be . 
that is exactly what I am doing at this moment . 
senator Corbin : 
honourable senators , in pursuance of the point I raised with Senator Cools , she should not mistake my attitude . 
she made me feel very receptive to her point of view . 
nevertheless , we must choose our words carefully . 
there have been interpretations from the Chair in the other place from time to time that you cannot do indirectly what is directly prohibited . 
when one quotes from a newspaper article or letter from anyone who is not a player in a debate , that quote becomes your quote . 
although it was Mr. Meyer who wrote it , it was Senator Cools who proffered that word in the Senate . 
senator Cools may do what she wants with this , but I do not think it adds to the weight of her thesis . 
in fact , I think it diminishes the entire debate . 
senator Cools : 
point of order 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
i should like the Speaker to take this motion under consideration and then rule it out of order . 
there is it nothing in the bill which affects the Royal Prerogative or Royal Assent . 
the bill only suggests that the traditional ceremony , which is not legislated , be kept , and , as an alternative , Royal Assent be given through a message . 
her Majesty ' s Prerogative , Royal Assent , the constituent third part of Parliament , would remain exactly the same . 
the bill is only suggesting that there be two methods of Royal Assent , with the one which we now practice being utilized at least twice a year . 
i believe that this motion goes way beyond the bill . 
it touches on issues which the bill does not even hint at ; that is , the Royal Prerogative . 
therefore , I ask that the Speaker rule it out of order . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I was intending to move the adjournment of the debate . 
however , Senator Lynch - Staunton has requested a ruling and I am not sure whether it is appropriate to adjourn the debate in the face of such a request . 
if it is , I will so move . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , a point of order has been raised . 
the normal practice is that the Speaker hears others who wish to speak to the point of order . 
at the point at which the Speaker believes that enough information has been provided , the Speaker may rule or take the matter under advisement . 
i will hear other senators who wish to speak to the point of order . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I agree with the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s point of order . 
the bill presently before us , which bill I support , has resulted from a practice of this chamber , and it is simply that . 
there must still be a means by which the Governor General , and therefore the Queen , appropriately gives assent to a piece of legislation . 
the bill deals with the process by which that assent will be given . 
from my interpretation , there is no violation whatsoever of the prerogative . 
i believe that the intent of this bill is to stop a practice which has been happening in this chamber with neither the Governor General nor members of the House of Commons in attendance . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
we have a series of safeguards built into the house procedures . 
a notice must be given so that honourable senators know ahead of time what proposal will be advanced by an honourable senator . 
any precondition imposed upon the liberty of the legislature or of a parliamentarian to introduce into the public debates of either House of Parliament must be explicitly provided for in the rules . 
there is no rule that places hoops through which an honourable senator must go before he or she may introduce a motion . 
the motion in amendment before us states in clear language that it is only when the sponsor of Bill S - 7 fulfils certain conditions . 
i find that to be the issue at the heart of the point of order that is before the Speaker at this point in time . 
we must be very careful in maintaining the liberty of all honourable senators not to be fettered by conditions other than those conditions that we would set down in order to facilitate the proper order and running of this house . 
the condition that is imposed here , in the plain language of the motion in amendment , is a form of censorship , in that it provides some kind of review or a set of hoops through which an honourable senator would have to go before he or she could make a motion . 
rule 2 of the Rules of the Senate reads : 
" bill " means a draft Act of Parliament and includes a private and a public bill ; 
this fits that definition , and there is nothing else in the rules under which this motion in amendment , in my view , respectfully submitted , falls . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I should like to respond . 
without restating everything that I have said in my remarks , I would ask that , in consideration of this point of order , my entire speech and the points that I have raised and the authorities that I have cited be included in His Honour ' s consideration . 
before I go on to try to respond to what Senator Lynch - Staunton has said , to my mind he has raised no valid point of order . 
as a matter of fact , he has not shown us in any way why there is a point of order . 
i would caution honourable senators about the process of using points of order to withdraw important questions from debate . 
i am not saying that that is what Senator Lynch - Staunton is doing ; nor do I believe that to be his intention . 
however , I do believe that Senator Lynch - Staunton , if he is raising a point of order , has some duty to show us his reasoning and to cite some of the precedents and authorities upon which he is relying . 
from what I have heard and from what Senator Lynch - Staunton has said , that is not so at all . 
my amendment is a good amendment . 
i am not speaking at all to the substance of the bill or to the merits or the contents of the bill in and of itself , as Senator Carstairs did . 
senator Carstairs was speaking as a supporter of the bill on the substance and the merits of the bill . 
the question before us right now is a point of order . 
i am sure that all honourable senators know , as does His Honour , that in point of fact questions of the Constitution and questions of constitutional law are not matters to be properly decided by the Speaker of the Senate . 
these are matters that should be left to the whole chamber . 
my amendment is clear on the face of it . 
i have given my copy of it to Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
i did not say that there should be any limitation on him . 
honourable senators , what is not before us in this point of order is the question of whether or not Senator Lynch - Staunton has a right to do what he is doing . 
what is before us is whether or not he is proceeding in a manner that is consistent with the Constitution of this place and the Constitution of this country and with the law of Parliament and with the interests of Her Majesty the Queen . 
these issues have been debated quite extensively . 
i will put on the record one of the most definitive statements ever made on this particular matter . 
this statement was made in the House of Lords on March 30 , 1911 by Lord Lansdowne . 
honourable senators may recall that there was a landmark debate at that time . 
if honourable senators could be reminded , the issue at the time in the U . K . was the alteration of the powers of the Lords and Her Majesty in respect of Royal Assent for bills that were passed in the House of Commons . 
it was a very important debate , honourable senators , and I would have expected Senator Lynch - Staunton to come forward with some of the history and precedents . 
for the time being , I will quote Lord Lansdowne . 
he said : 
... seems to us to suggest that it is certainly a breach of the law of Parliament to pass through either house a bill affecting the prerogative of the Crown without the assent of the Crown . 
honourable senators , the Royal Consent is the assent in advance . 
he continued : 
i do not think anyone will dispute that . 
we also conclude from these precedents that although this assent may be signified at any stage , it is the proper course to obtain it before the introduction of the Bill . 
the citation that I used in my previous speech clearly goes to the point that it has been agreed that the proper thing that should be done is that the Royal Consent should be obtained before the introduction of the bill . 
all the authorities go on to say that it may be obtained , especially by ministers acting under responsibility , at a later phase . 
it is unmistakably clear and cannot be disputed that this debate has been going on for quite some years . 
we have heard no indication whatsoever from Senator Lynch - Staunton about how he intends to satisfy the Royal Consent . 
one can try to articulate things in any particular form or fashion ; however , the fact of the matter is that any parliamentary action or any parliamentary bill that is proposing to alter Her Majesty ' s Royal Prerogative must obtain her Royal Consent , which is another way of saying " the assent in advance . " 
that sort of custom , honourable senators , is also replicated in another area of Royal Prerogative , namely , the financial initiatives of the Crown . 
in the instance of the Royal Recommendation , it is more difficult . 
that is mandated by sections 53 and 54 of the BNA Act , 1867 . 
that recommendation must be given in the House of Commons before the bill is introduced . 
on the particular issue of the Royal Consent , it can be given later . 
however we cut it , honourable senators , the fact of the matter is that one cannot convincingly and credibly believe that we can have a discussion in this chamber about the future of Her Majesty ' s powers in respect of Royal Assent without consulting the Governor General or Her Majesty herself . 
the fact that this point has been slighted , diminished and overlooked for the past couple of years is precisely the reason I introduced this amendment to the motion for second reading , so that the debate can arise as to whether or not a Royal Consent is necessary . 
it would seem to me that it would take more than an assertion by either Senator Carstairs or Senator Lynch - Staunton that it is unnecessary . 
at least I have placed the precedents and the history on the record , and I have many more references , should the debate continue . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
order ! 
honourable Senator Cools , I interrupted you because I felt that you were going to the substance of the bill but not to the point of order that was raised . 
do any other honourable senators wish to speak to the point of order that was raised ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
no one in this chamber would dare challenge it . 
that is not for us . 
it is a constitutional requirement , which we respect . 
the bill merely suggests that Royal Assent be expressed in a different way as an alternative to the present one , while keeping the present practice . 
therefore , I feel that the whole premise of this motion is completely out of order and should be so ruled . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak to the point of order ? 
if not , I will take the matter under advisement . 
debate adjourned to await Speaker ' s Ruling . 
legal and Constitutional Affairs 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
leave having been given to proceed to Motions : 
hon. Lorna Milne , pursuant to notice of November 25 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I will not repeat what I said here on more than one occasion . 
if I object to these types of motions , my finger is not pointed at the chairman of any committee . 
actually , I sympathize with them because they are stuck with a schedule that forces them to meet at 3:30 , which is what the schedule says for Wednesdays . 
four committees are stuck with this schedule , including Foreign Affairs , Banking , Social Affairs and Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
not to say that other committees are of lesser importance , but these are some of the most active committees . 
someone has imposed on them a schedule to meet at 3:30 , knowing full well that on more than one occasion recently we have gone beyond the 3:30 hour on Wednesday and have sat until 5:00 or 6:00 . 
consequently , they must come repeatedly back to the Senate to ask for an exemption . 
why can someone not revisit the committee schedule and tailor it to the schedule of the Senate rather than ask the Senate to tailor its schedule to that of the committees ? 
it is as simple as that . 
i sympathize with Senator Milne . 
senator Kolber is about to ask for the same permission , and I understand why . 
it is our fault , because we have accepted a schedule that is not working properly . 
we should honour our schedule here and decide that on Wednesdays we will adjourn at 3:30 no matter what . 
that was the agreement at the time . 
now , we seldom sit on a Monday evening , but we still aim for a short Wednesday . 
this system is not working . 
during the break , I hope that someone will come up with a more realistic schedule than the one we have now . 
again , I will state my frustration , which , I believe , is shared by many . 
i suggest strongly that when we come back in February , if alterations have not been made , leave will be refused in order to force an alteration to this schedule , which , obviously , is not working . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rose the last time we heard from Senator Lynch - Staunton on this issue , and I rise again . 
i do not disagree with him . 
in fact , I understand his point very well . 
as Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate - and , I think I have cooperation from the other side on this - we are attempting to make the schedule work better . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it was moved by the Honourable Senator Milne , seconded by the Honourable Senator Taylor : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
banking , Trade and Commerce 
committee Authorized to Meet During Sitting of the Senate 
hon. Leo E . Kolber : 
honourable senators , first , I wish to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his remarks . 
we are just poor senators working in the trenches and we take our orders . 
with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) , I move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce have power to sit at 3:30 p.m. today , even though the Senate may then be sitting , and that rule 95 ( 4 ) be suspended in relation thereto . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
motion to Authorize Committee to Review Canadian Environmental Protection Act - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Mira Spivak rose pursuant to notice of motion of November 2 , 1999 : 
that the Senate urge the Government to begin immediately its review of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act and to designate the first phase of that review to the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources . 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources begin immediately a review of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act as unanimously recommended in the committee ' s seventh report dated September 8 , 1999 and tabled in the Senate the following day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted to amend the motion as moved by Honourable Senator Spivak ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Spivak : 
i move the amended motion standing in my name . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion as amended ? 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , this motion urging the government to begin immediately a review of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act was not my preferred way of doing things nor the preferred way of senators on this side of the chamber . 
we wanted an opportunity to fix a bill that was badly flawed before it was passed . 
unfortunately , we could not improve Bill C - 32 . 
we faced closure twice , in committee and here in the Senate . 
it was not even possible to ensure that the law had the same meaning in French and in English in a particular clause . 
senators opposite proposed in their majority report that the government begin the next review immediately after the passage of Bill C - 32 . 
this will ensure that Canadians from across the country have the opportunity to express their views and to monitor the progress the minister makes in carrying forward and further defining concepts , such as " cost - effective " , " virtual elimination " , " intergovernmental environment agreements " , and " precautionary principle " . 
in our minds , that is no way to run a railway - to let the train out of the station and then have the engineer come back to tell you where it is going . 
we have a duty to know the meaning behind those concepts and to ensure that the law clearly states those meanings so that Canadians everywhere can understand . 
we heard an impassioned plea from a former public servant who asked us not to leave undefined the term " cost - effective . " 
we were asked not to leave public servants twisting in the breeze when they try to enforce the law to protect public health and the environment . 
senators opposite wanted to do things differently , so here we are with their suggestions . 
frankly , part of what they suggested just cannot be done . 
the five - year review , according to section 343 , must be a comprehensive review of the act ' s provisions and its operations . 
we cannot review where the train has travelled before the journey has begun , but we can review the engineer ' s trip plan . 
we can look at how the minister intends to implement this act . 
as the committee ' s majority suggested , we can give Canadians from across the country the opportunity to express their views first and monitor the progress later . 
that requires addressing nine substances a day , 365 days a year , or more than 13 substances per day accounting for holidays and weekends . 
how is that feasible ? 
presumably some of those 23,000 substances are no longer in use and it will be a paper chase to discover them . 
for those still in use , the minister has two choices . 
next , officials can try to do the tougher part of the job - obtaining the data that establishes whether exposure to a substance at a given concentration over a given period of time injures people or the environment . 
in many cases , including some of the few dozen substances on the priority substances list , exposure data is very hard to come by . 
for that reason alone , several substances have not been regulated . 
the minister ' s second option is to lump these steps together and bog down the process . 
i am informed that , unless he chooses that option , some industries are preparing to take the minister to court . 
it would not be in their interests for officials to cast their chemicals as inherently toxic . 
i am sorry that this is kind of abstruse , but it would take a long time to explain all the different arguments and the different explanations that we really had during the course of the bill . 
i hope you will take my word for this kind of categorization . 
which will it be ? 
a process that is feasible or a process that some industries favour . 
committee members could do a useful job even in exposing the difficulties here . 
it would also be helpful to have the minister set out his plan to achieve virtual elimination . 
our committee received the memo in which one of his senior officials wrote that virtual elimination , under the new bill , would be impossible to achieve . 
we would like to know exactly how the minister plans to try to make it work . 
it is important to Canadians , and to none more than to those in the North . 
the Canadian model is being touted at negotiations towards a global treaty on persistent organic pollutants . 
without a strong , persistent , organic pollutants treaty , the Canadian Arctic will continue to be the world ' s worst toxic waste dump for PCBs , DDT - breakdown products and other airborne , persistent , bioaccumulative chemicals . 
therefore , when the POPS treaty delegates meet next March in Bonn , the minister should be prepared to have the Canadian model ready for scrutiny . 
before that time , we should have done our work and given Canadians a chance to express their opinions . 
i suggest that this immediate review take place before our Senate committee for very practical reasons . 
first , the committee in the other place has a full slate . 
it has yet to complete a review of the system dealing with pesticides . 
the minister has promised major legislation on endangered species and , with any luck , we should see some movement on climate change . 
our committee does not have a huge backlog of bills to consider at this time . 
second , it was our committee that faced closure and our committee that proposed that the review begin post - haste . 
third , the committee in the other place dealt with the Canadian Environmental Protection Act , off and on , for six years . 
they fought the good fight and , in the end , were overruled by a government that listened to industry lobbyists . 
it would be fair to say that their efforts were exhausted , at least for a while . 
on this side , our long - term objective is still to improve the legislation . 
we should like , among other things , to remedy the fact that the legislation does not require the government to take steps towards phasing out even a handful of the worst toxic pollutants . 
this is harmful to all Canadians but especially to northerners . 
the act does not require the government to follow a precautionary principle that means much of anything . 
in fact , it has contradictory meanings in our two official languages . 
it excludes the M é tis from a new national advisory committee . 
it does not recognize the voluntary efforts of responsible private - sector corporations . 
it does nothing to deal with particular concerns about children ' s environmental health . 
it reduces the authority of the environment minister and hands over decision - making to the Governor in Council , especially on matters involving products of biotechnology . 
it also removes the authority from the Environment Minister to examine the harmful effects of biotech products . 
on that last point , hopefully , the government is having second thoughts about reintroducing Bill C - 80 , the proposed food act . 
public interest groups , as well as many scientists within the Department of Health , objected to cabinet overtaking the authority of the Minister of Health and his duty to protect Canadians . 
i hope that the bill will be redrafted for the better . 
we had hoped to spend many more hours in committee before the revised bill became law . 
however , that did not happen and is now past history . 
we invite senators opposite to support their own recommendation and to call for an uncensored Canadian Environmental Protection Act review before our committee as soon as possible . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
would the Honourable Senator Spivak accept a question ? 
senator Spivak : 
Yes. 
senator Hays : 
the honourable senator ' s motion in its original form urged the government to take certain action . 
we have agreed that it be varied to the much stronger reference for a full study by the committee that the honourable senator chairs . 
is this something that the committee has discussed ? 
in other words , in the normal course , work of this nature originates usually from the committee pursuant to its discussions and desire to undertake a special study . 
is that the case with respect to this matter ? 
senator Spivak : 
no , that is not the case , as the Honourable Senator Hays well knows . 
this refers to prior business passed by the committee during its review of CEPA . 
of course , if the Senate makes a reference to the committee , I think the committee would need to consider it and how it fits in light of its timetable . 
we are talking about beginning a review . 
the last review took five years . 
it is on that basis that I am making the case as to why our committee should begin this review rather than a committee of the other place which , as honourable senators know , has many other things to consider before they reach us . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I was not aware that the motion had not been a matter of discussion in the committee . 
is this something that the Honourable Senator Spivak could raise with the committee as a whole and advise us as to its desire or lack thereof to conduct the study ? 
senator Spivak : 
perhaps the proper thing is to have someone adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Taylor , debate adjourned . 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
the intention is behind those words . 
i wish to quote from Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms , 6 th Edition , paragraph 485 ( 1 ) , which states : 
unparliamentary words may be brought to the attention of the House either by the Speaker or by any Member . 
when the question is raised by a Member it must be as a point of order and not as a question of privilege . 
i wish at this time to reserve my right with respect to what I consider unparliamentary language to have an opportunity to examine the record and to come back to this matter at a subsequent sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the Honourable Senator Corbin has in effect raised a point of order to be deferred . 
as we all know , the rules on points of order state that they must be brought up at the first opportunity available . 
the honourable senator has done so today . 
is it agreed that he may proceed tomorrow based on the reading of the text ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Cools : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Honourable Senator Cools objects . 
senator Corbin : 
i heard a " no " from a person who is not in her seat . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i have no agreement to entertain the motion to defer until tomorrow . 
senator Corbin : 
may I suggest , Your Honour , in view of the words of the citation that , " Unparliamentary words may be brought to the attention of the House either by the Speaker or by any Member " that you take it upon yourself to rule on this matter ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
this is a proper point of order . 
i have been asked by an honourable senator to have a look at the text and to decide whether the rules have been offended . 
i undertake to do so . 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
committee Authorized to Study Matters Related to Mandate 
hon. Mira Spivak , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources , in accordance with rule 86 ( 1 ) ( p ) , be authorised to examine such issues as may arise from time to time relating to energy , the environment , and natural resources generally in Canada ; and 
that the Committee report to the Senate no later than March 31 , 2000 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Mira Spivak , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical , and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it ; and 
that the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Mira Spivak , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 15 
Thursday , December 2 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
international Day of Disabled Persons 
the Francophonie 
national Day of Remembrance 
tenth Anniversary of Tragedy at L 'É cole Polytechnique 
international Treaty to Ban Land Mines 
second Anniversary 
fortieth Annual Meeting Held in Quebec City 
environment 
Manitoba - North Dakota Devil ' s Lake Diversion 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
public Service Whistleblowing Bill 
first Reading 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
inter - Parliamentary Group 
report of Fortieth Annual Meeting Held in Quebec City Tabled 
fisheries 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Matters Related to Its Mandate 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( A ) Presented and Printed as Appendix 
question PERIOD 
transport and Communications 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Review by Standing Committee 
transport 
shutdown of Inter -- Canadian Airlines - Effect of Order Issued Under Section 47 of Canada Transportation Act 
Indian Affairs 
Nova Scotia - Attempted Suicides on Membertou Reserve - Request for Concrete and Proactive Measures of Assistance for Aboriginal Communities 
Nova Scotia - Attempted Suicides on Membertou Reserve - Request by Band Leaders for Meeting with Minister 
health 
federal Funding Transfers to Provinces 
finance 
auditor General ' s Report - Efficacy of Budgetary Long - term Planning 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
foreign Affairs 
increase in Capital Expenditures in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) - Possible Opening of New Embassies 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for address in Reply - Debate Continued 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
international Search or Seizure Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
third Report of Committee - Order Withdrawn 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Estimates - Debate Adjourned 
motion in Amendment 
national Finance 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
adjournment 
the SENATE 
Thursday , December 2 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
international Day of Disabled Persons 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , tomorrow , December 3 , is International Day of Disabled Persons . 
Canadians will join millions around the world in the celebration of progress on the global disability agenda . 
the Senate of Canada takes part in that celebration . 
all Canadians , but particularly Canadians with disabilities , look to us to share in their vision of a society in which equality for all is a reality . 
senators share that vision , of course , and today represents a concrete step toward turning that vision into a tangible reality . 
senators will recall that in 1998 we made a commitment to develop a strategy to improve accessibility to and participation in Senate affairs by Canadians with disabilities . 
that included visitors , Canadians seeking information on the Senate , participation in committee work , Senate employees , and colleagues in this chamber , who have a disability . 
the approach we decided on had three component parts : a senator ' s guide to disability ; an action plan ; and training and awareness sessions . 
the first component , a booklet entitled " A Senator ' s Guide to Disability " , is a reference document for use by us all ; it provides current information and tips on how to deal with questions on disability from interested Canadians . 
it is also a practical guide that confirms our role as champions of equality and facilitators for change at the community level . 
it is a quick read and I will be tabling it in the Senate next week . 
senators should be aware that this guide will also be available on the Senate Intranet to permit reading with technological assistance . 
it will also soon be available in Braille . 
the second component is a disability action plan that is realistic with measurable results . 
some of our colleagues and Senate officials have begun developing such a plan under the guidance of a team of disability experts . 
the issues are complex and the scope of the plan will be fairly comprehensive , covering such matters as public information , employment , technical aid , facilities , and security . 
this document is currently in an early drafting stage . 
the Senate of Canada action plan will not dramatically change our environment overnight , but in time I believe it could become a model for other governing bodies . 
i look forward to joining my colleague Senator Carstairs in presenting this action plan to you in February 2000 . 
the third component of our disability strategy involves the delivery of training and awareness sessions on disability , with more detail on leading issues - who is who and who is doing what - and some information on the opportunities and the challenges of the next millennium . 
this , too , will be ready by February 2000 . 
honourable senators , it is in these ways that we can create for all Canadians a fair chance to fully participate in Senate affairs . 
it is only fitting that on the eve of International Day of Disabled Persons we are rededicating ourselves to making integration and equality a practical reality for all . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , Senator Robertson was extremely generous throughout her remarks today on the eve of International Day of the Disabled . 
she repeatedly used the pronoun " we " . 
honourable senators should understand that the impetus for this action came from Senator Brenda Robertson . 
i was a mere bit player in the production of the document that will be delivered to you next week and in the action plan that you will get later on . 
there were other important players , and those players are sitting in the north gallery . 
they are in the north gallery , honourable senators , because that is the gallery that is now accessible to the disabled . 
sitting up there are Mr. Skip Brooks , Mr. Lawrence Euteneier , Mr. Jim Turner , Mrs. Claudette Fleury - Morena , Mrs. Pina DiFranco and Mrs. Julie Richer . 
absent are Mrs. Marie Trudeau , and Mrs. Bernadette Quade and Mr. Luc Clairoux . 
i thank Senator Robertson for beginning this initiative . 
the Francophonie 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I speak often of the international Francophonie . 
consequently , people have asked me what the Francophonie is . 
this reminds me of an experience I had a few years ago , when I had the pleasure of meeting the former president of France , Val é ry Giscard d ' Estaing . 
i was accompanied by my colleague Senator De Ban é . 
i asked Mr. Giscard d ' Estaing what the Francophonie meant to him . 
his response was : " It is France ! " 
i realized there was a misunderstanding because , for me , the Francophonie is not France , it is far more than that . 
so I looked for a definition and I have found one , which I shall read to you : 
the Francophonie is , first , the community of peoples which , to varying degrees , speak or use French in their national lives or in their international relations . 
it is also , however , a body of organizations and associations , governmental and non - governmental , engaged in sectors of activity and areas of interest common to the members of the francophone community . 
since the advent of the Francophonie summits , which bring together the heads of state and of government of the countries sharing the use of French , the Francophonie has evolved into a forum for political dialogue and for exchanges , focussing on the mobilization of the necessary resources for co - operation between peoples . 
honourable senators , I believe this is an accurate definition . 
national Day of Remembrance 
tenth Anniversary of Tragedy at L 'É cole Polytechnique 
hon. Catherine S . Callbeck : 
honourable senators , I rise today because Monday , December 6 , 1999 , marks the tenth anniversary of the tragedy at Montreal ' s L 'É cole Polytechnique . 
on December 6 , 10 years ago , a gunman entered this college and killed 14 women only because they were women . 
this event was a cruel reminder to all Canadians that violence against women is all too prevalent . 
this tragedy forced us to be more aware of the importance of this issue and , second , it helped motivate us to focus our energy on ending violence against women . 
Canadians have acted by designating December 6 as the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women . 
now , every year , Canadians remember and pay tribute , not only to the 14 women who died on that day in 1989 , but also to the women who live daily with the threat of violence in their lives , and to other women who have been killed by deliberate acts of violence . 
action has been continued with events such as the White Ribbon Campaign , which encourages men to pin on a white ribbon and pledge never to commit , condone or remain silent about violence against women . 
the Prince Edward Island Advisory Council on the Status of Women has had a Purple Ribbon Campaign , which is celebrating its eighth anniversary this year . 
this campaign distributes approximately 8,000 purple ribbons and cards to Islanders . 
this program helps to raise awareness about violence against women and children . 
the federal and provincial governments in Canada have also taken recent steps . 
the Iqaluit Declaration made simultaneously , on December 6 , 1998 , in all provinces and territories across Canada , reflects the commitment of governments to end violence against women . 
these are positive steps , but there is still much left to be done . 
this year , on December 6 , I hope that we will all take time , not only to remember all the women whose lives have been affected by violence , but to think of concrete action that can be taken to avoid violence against women . 
international Treaty to Ban Land Mines 
second Anniversary 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , today is the second anniversary of the International Treaty to Ban Land Mines . 
the 1997 treaty , banning the use , production , stockpiling and transfer of antipersonnel land mines has been ratified by 89 countries and signed by 136 . 
by September of 1998 , 40 countries had ratified the treaty , thus making the treaty international law on March 1 , 1999 . 
this treaty is not only a testament to the commitment to a mine - free world , but is the fruition of the pursuit of humanitarian objectives by the Canadian government and by Foreign Affairs Minister Axworthy . 
we should also applaud the work of Mines Action Canada and other like - minded organizations in their continuing efforts to build a culture of peace . 
canada must maintain its efforts in building a culture of peace , and ensuring a just and secure world for the world ' s children , who , too often , are the innocent victims of the horrendous effects of war , both during and after conflicts . 
canada - United States Inter - Parliamentary Group 
fortieth Annual Meeting Held in Quebec City 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , as co - chair of the Canadian delegation , later this day I will present the report of the fortieth annual meeting of the Canada - U.S. Inter - Parliamentary Group , which took place in Quebec City from May 20 to 24 , 1999 . 
the meeting this year in Quebec City followed the trend we had set at a previous meeting in Canada two years ago , when we met at Fortress Louisbourg in Cape Breton , and culminated our meeting in the Confederation Room in Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island . 
it is your co - chair ' s desire that while we exchange views we give our American colleagues a deeper , more perceptive understanding of the Canadian milieu and a living lesson in Canadian history . 
we had an open and candid exchange of views on the myriad issues and problems confronting our bilateral relations . 
we should never forget that although trade irritants between our two countries receive instantaneous media coverage , 97 per cent of our two - way trade is conducted peacefully , effectively and fruitfully for both our countries . 
this close working relationship with our congressional colleagues in the United States assists in resolving issues in the American Congress when they arise . 
not the least of these was the recent decision of the American executive to delay implementation of section 110 of the U.S. Immigration Naturalization Service Act , a proposal for visa requirement for entry to the United States . 
questions we raised at the thirty - eighth , thirty - ninth , and fortieth annual meetings of our group resulted in two private bills being introduced into Congress . 
honourable senators , great attention has been paid to the increasing congestion and gridlock encountered all along the border crossings because of the explosive increase in trade in the last five years , and the overlapping jurisdictions that appear there . 
the co - chairs and other members of the other place attended and spoke recently in Washington at a Can - Am Border Trade Alliance conference . 
i will be presenting a report of this meeting within the next few days to the Senate . 
honourable senators , allow me once again to encourage all of you to read the extensive compendium of issues in the report to be tabled later this day , to join this association , and to work actively with us to enhance our relations with our American colleagues as we move toward a mutually beneficial future . 
more issues unite us than divide us . 
still , our trade relationship requires constant vigilance and due diligence . 
may I thank my Canadian co - chair , Joe Comuzzi of the other place , our senior staff person , Carol Chafe , our American co - chairs , Senator Frank Murkowski of Alaska and Representative Amo Houghton of New York State , their staff and all honourable senators for their marvellous and delightful cooperation , in the interest of our two great neighbours . 
we look forward to the Senate ' s active involvement in all these works at future meetings . 
environment 
Manitoba - North Dakota Devil ' s Lake Diversion 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
honourable senators , I should like to bring to your attention the events in Manitoba concerning the proposed Devil ' s Lake diversion . 
it is a frightening name for a frightening water project . 
the State of North Dakota is planning to dump excess water from Devil ' s Lake into the Red River . 
as you may know , the Red River flows north into Manitoba and empties into Lake Winnipeg . 
the Red River supports more than 50 species of freshwater fish , and biologists consider it to be the second - richest waterway in Canada after the St. Lawrence River . 
because of flooding problems on Devil ' s Lake , the State of North Dakota wants to build a 3 - mile - long drainage ditch into the Red River . 
devil ' s Lake is highly saline and contains harmful chemicals . 
more important , it contains some very aggressive and commercially useless fish species that are alien to Canadian waters . 
these fish species belong to the Gulf of Mexico watershed . 
the Red River - and in fact all of Manitoba ' s rivers - feed into the Arctic watershed . 
these watersheds are divided by a natural height of land and their resident species have been separate for 10,000 years . 
introducing Devil ' s Lake fish to the Red River would be as risky as introducing rabbits to Australia . 
as a Manitoba senator , a property owner along Lake Winnipeg , and a member of the Lake Winnipeg Watch group , I can assure you that this will become a very contentious project . 
lake Winnipeg is already under assault . 
hydro regulation of the lake has contributed to flooding and shoreline erosion . 
artificially high water levels have all but killed off the once - legendary Netley Marshes . 
this project has the potential of becoming another nail in the coffin of one of Canada ' s largest lakes . 
i am pleased to see that , finally , the federal government is taking an interest in this matter . 
in a statement last month , President Clinton said that he will refuse to authorize any diversion that would threaten Canada ' s waters . 
premier Gary Doer of Manitoba , however , recently toured the proposed diversion site and returned with the news that North Dakota is planning to fast - track the project , with plans to begin construction as early as next October . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
public Service Whistleblowing Bill 
first Reading 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) presented Bill S - 13 , to assist in the prevention of wrongdoing in the Public Service by establishing a framework for education on ethical practices in the workplace , for dealing with allegations of wrongdoing and for protecting whistleblowers . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - First Reading 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor presented Bill S - 14 , to amend the Act of incorporation of the Board of Elders of the Canadian District of the Moravian Church in America . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Taylor , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday next , December 7 , 1999 . 
canada - United States Inter - Parliamentary Group 
report of Fortieth Annual Meeting Held in Quebec City Tabled 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Fortieth Annual Meeting of the Canada - United States Interparliamentary Group , Quebec City , May 20 to 24 , 1999 . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study Matters Related to Its Mandate 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , December 7 , 1999 , I shall move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be authorized to examine and report upon the matters relating to the fishing industry ; 
that the Committee report no later than December 12 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I give notice that , on Tuesday next , December 7 , 1999 , I shall move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I give notice that , on Tuesday next , December 7 , 1999 , I shall move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( A ) Presented and Printed as Appendix 
leave having been given to revert to Presentation of Reports from Standing or Special Committees : 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance , which deals with Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , 1999 - 00 . 
i request that the report be printed as an appendix to today ' s Journals of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Murray , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
transport and Communications 
shutdown of Inter - Canadian Airlines - Possibility of Review by Standing Committee 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communication . 
if so , what did he say about the financial situation of his company ? 
if it has not heard him , does the committee intend to hear him ? 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , the committee has not yet reported , as it has not completed its deliberations . 
we will be sitting next week , and when the report is completed , I will present it to this house . 
senator Kinsella : 
does your committee , like the committee in the other place , intend to study this very serious situation or is it a routine matter for the committee ? 
senator Bacon : 
honourable senators , our committee received an order of reference , and the mandate of this house is honoured by the committee . 
that is what we are doing at the moment , and once we have concluded , we will table the report . 
transport 
shutdown of Inter -- Canadian Airlines - Effect of Order Issued Under Section 47 of Canada Transportation Act 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a further supplementary question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
page 2 of this letter states , in part : 
undoubtedly , Inter - Canadien is a victim of policies and actions which were designed to benefit other industry participants , many of whom have a competitive interest in the demise of Inter - Canadien . 
we fully expect the various shareholders in Inter - Canadien will insist that we instruct our legal counsel to examine fully , and then to take , whatever legal or other recourse is available to Inter - Canadian and its stakeholders to redress this situation . 
what is the government ' s position as to its responsibility for this difficulty that the President of Inter - Canadian asserts it is having because of events that unfolded pursuant to the issuance of the order under section 47 of the Canada Transportation Act ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i wish to thank the honourable senator for his question . 
i have not had the opportunity to examine the letter of the President of Inter - Canadian in detail with respect to the position of his company or , indeed , with respect to his allegations . 
if he feels there is anything actionable against the Government of Canada , I am sure he will proceed . 
i do not know , for example , how large the financial problems of Inter - Canadian are at the moment or how large they were before section 47 was invoked . 
whether those financial problems pre - dated section 47 or whether they were attributable to other elements with respect to the operation of that particular company , I do not know . 
the responsibility of the Government of Canada was spelled out clearly by the Minister of Transport in outlining the principle that service to smaller communities in Canada is protected and will continue to be protected . 
whether it involves the fate of a particular company in a given set of circumstances , that will be hard to say . 
the government and the minister have clearly set out the principles upon which to act . 
i will not repeat them , as I am sure the honourable senator is aware of all the principles which will guide the government ' s action . 
Indian Affairs 
Nova Scotia - Attempted Suicides on Membertou Reserve - Request for Concrete and Proactive Measures of Assistance for Aboriginal Communities 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
last week , in Sydney , Nova Scotia , four children aged 9 to 13 went into the woods on their reserve , intent on brutally killing themselves . 
two boys from the Membertou band , the third largest Mi ' Kmaq reserve in Nova Scotia , actually attempted to commit suicide by hanging themselves from trees - one with a clothesline wire and the other with a rope . 
police and other children managed to cut them down before their actions proved fatal . 
we have communities in crisis all over this country . 
native children , Canadian children , are killing themselves . 
a 1997 University of Toronto study revealed that the annual suicide rate among natives aged 15 to 24 is about 110 per 100,000 people , compared to about 25 suicides for every 100,000 people of that age in the rest of the population . 
on Tuesday , the Council and Chief of the Membertou Band issued a plea for help to the Department of Indian Affairs to provide adequate funding for counselling and programming for native parents and children . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am aware of the general circumstances to which the honourable senator has referred . 
however , I am not aware of the specific details of the individual incidents . 
in any event , the challenges for us in communities such as Membertou , and these communities exist across the country , is real and one which has existed for decades - indeed , perhaps centuries . 
it is a challenge that the Government of Canada is attempting to meet in a constructive way through the many programs offered by the department . 
i am sure the minister in question will seriously consider the requests made by the representatives of Membertou . 
in fact , I hope to have a discussion with him and with some of the representatives of that community myself over the next number of days . 
Nova Scotia - Attempted Suicides on Membertou Reserve - Request by Band Leaders for Meeting with Minister 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , it was interesting that the leader referred to the Minister for Indian and Northern Affairs , Mr. Robert Nault , because , as he knows , the Membertou council and chief have requested a face - to - face meeting with him . 
is the minister prepared to respond to this request ? 
if so , when ? 
can it take place within the next several weeks ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , only literally minutes before entering the chamber I became aware of the request for a meeting . 
i will do what I can to facilitate such a request . 
ultimately , the decision is left to the minister , but I know that he will be concerned about the circumstances surrounding this request and will respond as soon as he is able . 
health 
federal Funding Transfers to Provinces 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask the minister whether he intends to tell his cabinet colleagues about a major issue in all regions of Canada , namely funding for health , social services and education . 
if we read the newspapers , or if we follow the hospital situation in all the provinces , we realize that provincial governments are faced with major underfunding problems . 
the shortage of financial resources to maintain the quality of care in just about every hospital in the country results in a lack of personnel and equipment , congestion in emergency rooms , reductions in resources and staff working with the elderly , et cetera . 
the federal government has huge surpluses . 
instead of setting up projects that are of some interest , such as the millennium scholarships in education , or the recent initiative to fight diabetes , does the minister not agree that it is time the Canadian government transferred a large part of its surpluses to the provincial governments ? 
apart from ensuring the smooth operation of our federal system and the adequate provision of services to all Canadians , such a transfer would allow provincial governments to adequately fulfil their constitutional responsibilities in the areas of health , social services and education . 
the fulfilment of these needs is critical to the well - being of our society . 
is it not time the Government of Canada recognized this urgent request by all regions of the country ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the challenges are partly due to what has been historically a dramatic growing demand resulting from a number of factors , not the least of which is the demographics of the country . 
our demographics will continue , as we move into the next decade , to be a major problem . 
the federal government has responded well through the 1999 budget , but I would not begin to tell the honourable senator that there are not great challenges ahead . 
perhaps that is one area that will be the greatest challenge for the federal government and the provincial governments in our country over the next decade . 
senator Rivest : 
setting aside any other priorities it might have for these surpluses , could the Government of Canada not just make a significant transfer of funds , outright and directly , to the provincial governments so that they can deal with the extremely pressing needs of health care ? 
you were Minister of Social Affairs . 
you were well aware that , without additional funding , which could only come from the Canadian government , you would be unable to meet the pressing needs of health care . 
with significant and substantial assistance from the Canadian government , provincial governments will be able to meet these needs . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , as I said , the government has taken action over the last year or so to reinstate large amounts of funding to the provinces . 
simply increasing funding amounts , in my humble view , is not the answer . 
it is shovelling more into the inexhaustible hole of demand . 
i suspect more funding will be required as the demands on the system continue to increase , and we also require the capacity to develop innovative approaches to the delivery of health care and innovative breakthroughs in terms of health care solutions . 
an example of the commitment on the part of this government is the new health care research funding . 
the government has demonstrated significant commitment . 
i am confident it will continue to demonstrate that commitment as we move forward . 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I do not wish to drag out the debate indefinitely . 
first the government invests in medical research , then it announces the establishment of a program for muscular dystrophy , after which it announces a program for another disease . 
this is how the federal government defines health care priorities . 
that is not its role . 
ignoring provincial jurisdiction is not acceptable ! 
you will not convince our people that this is an acceptable solution . 
what it boils down to is that the federal government is interfering in health care . 
it says that one service is more urgent than another . 
this is not reasonable . 
the federal government has more important things to do at a higher level . 
its role is to distribute the country ' s resources . 
it has major roles to play in international politics , monetary policy and so forth . 
the public will not stand for it . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator is quite right . 
the delivery of health care obviously has been and will no doubt continue to be a provincial responsibility . 
however , to say that the federal government has no role to play in health care other than sending a cheque would be a mistake . 
in fact , the Canada Health Act is probably the single most influential piece of legislation in the country on health care . 
there is a role for the federal government to play . 
it is not on the front - line delivery , but that is why federal research funding and initiatives will be useful in allowing the provinces to meet the challenge . 
i agree that the provinces are on the front line . 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I have the feeling that officials in the federal Department of Health are saying that folks in Toronto , Vancouver and Quebec City do not know where the priorities lie and that they will tell them . 
that was just for starters . 
finance 
auditor General ' s Report - Efficacy of Budgetary Long - term Planning 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , as he has in the past , the Auditor General has again told Parliament that the two - to - five - year budget - planning horizon is much too short to take into account the longer - term implications of the fiscal choices we make , especially in the context of an ageing population and the fiscal pressure this entails . 
honourable senators , this is not about setting targets or about meeting targets . 
this is about knowing the long - term implications of government policy decisions . 
even the public accounts committee in the other place has now endorsed the need for longer - term projections . 
yet the government continues to argue that giving us long - term information would undermine the importance and urgency of addressing immediate problems . 
honourable senators , could the government leader explain why the Auditor General is wrong when he says that only in considering the longer term can we fully appreciate the urgency of our fiscal situation ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , there are various purposes for planning , and different periods of planning are appropriate for different purposes . 
i can say quite safely and confidently that , in virtually every government department , long - term planning is taking place in the form of five - year plans , ten - year plans and beyond . 
for budgeting purposes , the Minister of Finance has said that it is a cautious but appropriate approach to deal with a two - year cycle when determining the specific budget requirements and revenue projections for a given year . 
that does not mean the government is not interested or indeed engaged in longer - term planning . 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , the attitude of the Auditor General strikes me as reasonable . 
i agree with the minister when he says that on a budgeting base of two years , that could be reasonable . 
i can understand that . 
the Auditor General says that the government should make longer studies available to the public . 
we have seen this , for example , in the area of pensions , where people were given pensions right away . 
pensions were given to people for 25 years and then , all of a sudden , the government woke up . 
Paul Martin looked at the issue and realized that it made no sense , that contributions had to be increased by 73 per cent over the next three years , or the plan was headed toward bankruptcy . 
that is not wise . 
the Auditor General says , and I agree , that we need statistics for a longer term . 
the example of the pensions is the finest one available . 
they realized it was easy to give pensions to people who had not contributed . 
now they are asking the next generation to pay for those pensions . 
that generation will probably receive less benefits than their parents . 
it is not right that my children should be paying for my pension , but that theirs will be smaller when they get to my age . 
even with the 73 per cent increase over the next four years , there will not be enough to resolve the problem . 
we have to look at the long - term implications . 
the government should make it mandatory to apply such a rule . 
it is a rule of wisdom for good management . 
every company does it . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , with respect to the Canada Pension Plan , obviously that is being reviewed . 
it is under the governance of both the federal and provincial governments . 
they meet on a triennial basis specifically to look at long - range objectives . 
i agree that operating without a long - range approach can saddle future generations with burdens to pay for services from which the present generation has benefited . 
the worst example of that is a government operating with large deficits . 
the record of this particular government has been excellent . 
that is the worst kind of example of what the honourable senator is discussing . 
luckily , the present Finance Minister and the present government have remedied that situation . 
i know the honourable senator will applaud them for it . 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate by the Honourable Senator Stratton on November 24 , 1999 , regarding the increase in capital expenditures in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) and the possible opening of new embassies . 
foreign Affairs 
increase in Capital Expenditures in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) - Possible Opening of New Embassies 
( response to question raised by Hon. Terry Stratton on November 24 , 1999 ) 
in response to the question regarding the proposed increase of $ 43,875,400 to the existing capital appropriation of $ 87,690,000 approved for the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade ( DFAIT ) through 1999 - 2000 Main Estimates , it should be noted that DFAIT ' s capital budget covers expenditures not only for real property but also for other tangible and intangible assets . 
of the proposed $ 131,565,000 , approximately $ 68 million is planned to be spent on real property . 
the balance will be spent on the maintenance of a global telecommunications network and information management technology systems , for the purchase of security systems and equipment , for the purchase of vehicles at missions abroad , for repairs and maintenance of property and for the purchase of furniture and furnishings . 
with respect to property projects , the Berlin project accounts for only $ 26.2 million of this total in 1999 - 2000 . 
the balance of the approved capital funding for Berlin will be spent in fiscal years 2000 - 01 through 2003 - 04 . 
a listing of major capital spending on real property projects in 1999 - 2000 is provided in the table below . 
spending levels are different than those presented last year in DFAIT ' s 1999 - 2000 Report on Plans and Priorities given such factors as delays in obtaining local building permits , contractors ' difficulties in obtaining labour and materials and extra time required to complete the design phase of certain projects . 
major Capital Property Projects 
1999 - 2000 Planned spending ( $ millions ) 
Beijing , China ( Compound Purchase ) 
Berlin , Germany ( Chancery Construction ) 
Berlin , Germany ( Official Residence Construction ) 
Cairo , Egypt ( Chancery Construction ) 
Caracas , Venezuela ( Chancery Purchase ) 
Geneva , Switzerland ( Chancery Construction ) 
Kingston , Jamaica ( Chancery Construction ) 
Nairobi , Kenya ( Chancery Construction ) 
new Delhi , India ( Staff Quarters Construction ) 
Tokyo , Japan ( Staff Quarters Construction ) 
Warsaw , Poland ( Chancery Addition / Renovation ) 
Seoul , Korea ( Chancery Relocation ) 
orders OF THE DAY 
speech from the Throne 
motion for address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
6 th day of resuming debate ) 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
you may even come to enjoy the workings of this place to the point where you will wish you reconsidered your initial remarks concerning your length of stay in the Senate . 
i appreciate the government leader ' s response to my question yesterday that he would try to get to Vimy House before the house reconvenes after Christmas . 
i would be delighted to accompany him . 
senator Hays , you have done many things in your public life and in the Senate . 
it seems only natural that eventually you would receive the call to take on the mantle of Deputy Leader in this place . 
it is becoming a tradition . 
your predecessor was a president of the Liberal Party , too . 
your positive contributions to committees here are well known . 
perhaps your experience will enable you to see the wisdom in considering more opportunities for the Committee of the Whole in studying legislation . 
i , for one , hope you will still be able to maintain an active role in the Senate ' s Agriculture Committee , especially during this time of crisis in the grain - farming community in Canada . 
senator Graham appeared to us on this side of the house as being an effective Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
he knew that it was his job to ensure passage of legislation through this place . 
however , in that role , he seemed to appreciate the job and , indeed , the importance of the opposition . 
it is our role to debate and to bring to the attention of the government and the people of Canada flaws in pieces of legislation as we see them . 
senator Graham also recognized that the Senate was not to be a rubber stamp for the work of the House of Commons . 
it is the role of the Senate to ponder further the effects of legislation , its wording , and listen attentively to those who both support and oppose legislation . 
while we had our disagreements over policy from time to time , Senator Graham always treated the opposition with respect and the role of the Senate with respect . 
it was a golden opportunity to engage in a visioning exercise and tell the people of Canada where this government saw Canada going in the years ahead . 
it should have established the raison d 'ê tre of this government , what it wants to do with the power it holds . 
the Pearson years were characterized by commitment to universal health care , our centennial , a new flag ; thus bringing Canada to a new level of awareness by countries around the world . 
the " Just Society " and the patriation of the Constitution were the focus of the Trudeau years . 
it was during Joe Clark ' s term as Prime Minister that we came closer together as Canadians , with a better understanding of each other through his description of Canada as a " community of communities " . 
as well , it was during this period that Canada forged the economic basis upon which Canada depends today : free trade agreements and tax reform , which makes the price of our exports competitive with those of our trading partners . 
it is important to review the governments of the last half of this century to see how the Chr é tien government is void of policy and foresight . 
a Speech from the Throne which is void of vision is not what the people of Canada deserve . 
let us go on . 
the speech is quite self - congratulatory in regard to how the government characterizes its role in the economy . 
on this subject , I wish to associate myself with the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate , Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
in his speech in reply to the Speech from the Throne he gave the government both the history and economic lessons as to who created Canada ' s financial crisis - the Trudeau Liberals - and who put in place a basis to resolve it - the Mulroney Conservatives . 
for my part , I can go back to my speech on the budget debate earlier this year . 
while I congratulated the government on balancing the budget , I also pointed out that there were many other economic levers it was ignoring . 
canada was not attracting sufficient foreign investment , taxes at all levels were too high , productivity is so low that it threatens our standards of living , and no target has been set for reducing Canada ' s debt . 
a number of economists are expressing their concern that the Canadian dollar will dip as low as 60 cents within the next five years . 
our present depressed dollar has resulted in a recent flurry of takeovers of Canadian companies . 
this has lead former premier of Alberta Peter Lougheed to state : 
my concern is with the passive governments and passive citizens and passive corporations about the number of acquisitions of significant Canadian concerns by American companies , and secondly , by the loss of decision - making in Canada by the loss of corporate head offices to United States centres . 
nothing has been done , as the Minister of Finance continues to concentrate on accumulating a surplus for the sake of doing so . 
the Speech from the Throne announces tax cuts , cuts which no one has noticed , cuts which do not even amount to the surplus in the Employment Insurance Fund . 
the government ' s inaction on the economy , the problems with taxes , productivity and foreign investment led Tom D ' Aquino , the head of the Business Council on National Issues , to state : 
the reality is that we have a government in Ottawa that fails to grasp the gravity of the situation facing the country . 
they see the economy doing well , more people with jobs , surpluses that keep growing and opinion polls with high approval ratings . 
people like you and me and so many others who dare to call for radical change and new ideas are often dismissed as self - interested scaremongers . 
nowhere is the government ' s inaction on these matters better seen than in the debate over the " brain drain " from Canada . 
the Prime Minister believes this matter is simply a myth , and I suppose he believes that if he takes no action on it , as he has done on so many other issues , it will either go away or he will not be held accountable . 
honourable senators , this was not the view of experts who appeared at our Senate summer caucus in Calgary in September . 
representatives of the industry , business , think - tanks and the academic world combined to tell us of the seriousness of the issue and the negative effect it is having as they try to compete in this global marketplace . 
of course , a concrete illustration of what the Prime Minister believes is a myth is given by John Roth , the Chief Executive Officer of Nortel Networks . 
he cites as the main reasons for the drift of our top people out of Canada : the weak Canadian dollar , the top marginal tax rate in Canada , and the exciting level of business activity outside Canada . 
the creation of an economic climate to induce people either to stay in Canada or come to Canada is the task of a government ' s fiscal , monetary and economic policies . 
as Canadian nationalist Peter C . Newman ' s commented on Mr. Roth ' s statement : 
i don ' t think he is saying , " I want to get the hell out of Canada . " 
rather , Mr. Newman believes Mr. Roth is saying : 
" i have no choice . " 
the government ' s lack of vision , lack of action in the fiscal and economic arena , except for balancing the budget on the backs of the provinces and Canada ' s poorest citizens , has created this problem . 
the government ' s continued inaction in the face of overwhelming evidence only exacerbates the problem . 
what good are these benefits for those who move back and forth from work to welfare as a regular part of their routine ? 
as Marjorie Doyle , of St. John ' s , Newfoundland , wrote in October : 
last week ' s Throne Speech was not addressed to me . 
her writing graphically describes the irrelevance of the speech ' s promise of a connected Internet future with the reality of life in a Newfoundland fishing port or in rural Canada . 
she states : 
the vision of Canada that has technological prowess as its centrepiece seems remote , exclusive even , when it is unfolded as you watch a man flip up onto the wharf his catch of herring or squid , using a simple tool . 
as the Speech from the Throne unrolls , adding to the general glorification of all things cyber , it is brought home to me yet again that the gap between Canada of the ruling sectors and the one that many Canadians are living in is wide indeed ... 
- and getting wider - 
an outport Newfoundland cannot be the only place where people and lifestyles are marginalized , if not all together denied , by the concept of Canada as Cyber Queen . 
there must be many Canadians in rural areas where cyberspace seems peripheral . 
on the day that last week ' s Throne Speech was delivered , the highway most travelled in one Newfoundland outport was the well - beaten path into gardens at the back of the community , gardens where men and women grow basic root crops in a way not much different from that of their ancestors in the early 19 th century , often working the very same patch of ground . 
men were out in trap - skiffs fishing , a primitive - looking eel trap was in place in the community pond , and the husband and wife who run a woods operation were hard at it . 
we cannot forget the roots of this country in the ongoing rush to embrace technology . 
the promise of increases in national child benefits to come in the year 2002 mean little to either the working poor or those on welfare who will see any increase taxed back by the provinces . 
at least we in this party have established a task force on poverty , ably co - chaired by my colleague Senator Cohen and the Progressive Conservative member of the House of Commons from Shefford , Diane St - Jacques , accompanied by Senator Lavoie - Roux . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Atkins , I regret to interrupt you , but your 15 - minute speaking time is elapsed . 
are you requesting leave to continue ? 
senator Atkins : 
Yes. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Atkins : 
i thank honourable senators . 
their recommendations begin to lay the basis for an effective family income security system and reasonable personal income tax rates for low - and medium - income Canadians . 
i commend the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate for not opposing Senator Gustafson ' s request for an emergency debate on this matter on November 3 . 
that debate illustrated the human suffering associated with the farming crisis , as well as the lack of a coherent national strategy to protect and enhance the family farm . 
we should not have to wait for a crisis to arise , as the government has done on so many other occasions , to discover that policies are lacking or non - existent . 
as Senator Andreychuk so succinctly put it in that debate : 
the bottom line is that there is no creative awareness within the federal government in particular , and there must be a new way of looking at the issues of farming in the West .... This 
is an immediate crisis . 
again , vision , imagination and the ability to come to grips with new issues escape this government . 
while we had a full and useful debate in the Senate on this subject , it simply should not have been necessary . 
the government had a golden opportunity to address agricultural issues in Canada in the Speech from the Throne , to set new direction , and to establish parameters for policies to protect the family farm . 
all of this could have been followed quickly by legislation introduced in the House of Commons to implement these new designs . 
what the farm community received in the Speech from the Throne was nothing , nothing at all . 
what about the areas that the government did touch upon in the Speech from the Throne ? 
with regard to our military , the speech began on a hopeful note , with a complimentary description of our troops as peacekeepers and in the world wars and in Korea . 
both in the body of the speech and the heading of " Canada ' s Place in the World " is placed probably the most disingenuous phrase ever placed in a Speech from the Throne : 
the government will also continue to ensure that the Canadian Forces have the capacity to support Canada ' s role in building a more secure world and will further develop the capacity of Canadians to help ensure peace and security in foreign lands . 
this from a government that has made our world - class frigates virtually useless by cancelling the helicopter purchases put in place by the previous government , and that is putting our troops in further danger by not moving swiftly to put in place new helicopters . 
in their opinion , at least another $ 500 million needs to be injected immediately . 
it is no longer acceptable for the Minister of Defence to state that the forces will continue to do more with less . 
he cannot , as he suggests , reorganize the budget , because the budget simply is not large enough to reorganize . 
in an article entitled , " Reforming Canada ' s Military " , authored by retired colonel Michel Drapeau , the government is called upon to revitalize the militia and the army reserves , reduce the number of generals by half , separate the functions of the civilian bureaucracy in the Defence Department from that of the military command , eliminate the public affairs departments of Defence , and get on with the job of properly equipping our forces . 
my own advice would be to implement the conclusions of the 1994 white paper on defence , handed down by this Liberal government . 
at the very least , this government should refrain from making statements about " continuing " to resource our Armed Forces when they have not yet begun to help . 
the Speech from the Throne did address the need for increased funding for research and development in Canada . 
i only hope that this is funding for fundamental research in universities , research in areas which the universities themselves believe are important . 
it is my belief that government must do better than the millennium fund announced by the Minister of Finance in his budget two years ago . 
i believe this situation of mounting debt , which affects thousands of students across Canada , can be successfully addressed . 
however , to do so will require not only the commitment of resources but also imagination in the design of a program which will not only help all post - secondary students but encourage them to excel in their studies and encourage those who have dropped out to return to complete their education . 
i will have more to say on this subject when I speak on my inquiry in the next few weeks . 
to paraphrase Rachna Gilmore , a recent recipient of the Governor General ' s Literary Award , it is important that we nurture not just those who walk along eyes downward , but also those who look at the stars and choose to dream . 
this country deserves a government that has a vision of the future that will inspire Canadians as we move into the next century . 
we deserve a government which dares to dream . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , I should like to share with you today my reactions to the Speech from the Throne opening the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament of Canada . 
i will focus on three themes : young children in Canada , parental leave , and human safety , especially the safety of children in developing countries . 
( 1520 ) 
first of all , I am pleased that the government is beginning to make early childhood its first priority . 
the Speech from the Throne reads as follows : 
no commitment we make today will be more important for the long - term prosperity and well - being of our society than the commitment to invest our efforts in very young children . 
the government must offer a range of options to parents and families to support them in their efforts to care for their children . 
parents are in great need of support and guidance in carrying out this primary responsibility . 
the well - being of children is dependent on a number of things . 
first , 52 weeks of parental leave will finally make it possible for parents to spend more time with their very young children without having to place them in the care of a third party . 
you will agree , honourable senators , that entrusting a very young child to a third party requires a great deal of advance preparation for most parents . 
i can say from personal experience that when my special research assistant returned from six months of maternity leave , she found it very difficult because , while maternity leave is for six months , most day care services take children at one year . 
there is a six - month period for which it is very difficult to find day care spots . 
in fact , most parents would like more support in achieving a better balance between child care and the tough demands of today ' s work place . 
a child ' s early years are critical to his long - term health and well - being . 
honourable senators , children living in minority communities across Canada deserve special attention if we wish to ensure the healthy development of all our children and their families . 
this is why it is very important to better assess and know the needs of francophone and Acadian children and families in Canada . 
therefore , recognizing the identity and realities of francophones is a major component of the future of francophone and Acadian children and young people . 
all Canadian children are entitled to the same services and development facilities . 
the importance we attach to early childhood now will allow thousands of children to enter adult life with confidence , creativity and determination . 
aside from the obvious social benefits of supporting early childhood development , the Vancouver Board of Trade sees clear economic benefits . 
i quote : 
our findings show that investment in our children ' s early development can reduce social problems , enhance capabilities and provide good economic payback . 
they conclude by saying : 
in short , investing in our children is good public policy . 
i applaud the Vancouver Board of Trade for taking this position by standing up for the children of Canada and defending their interests . 
honourable senators , I am sure you will all agree as parents , and some of us as grandparents , that the nurturing supportive family is the best foundation for good child development . 
parenting education , skill development , and support for parents and families is essential to improve circumstances for children . 
that is why early childhood development programs must be a fundamental component of this government ' s vision for the future . 
the third and last point of my presentation concerns population and development . 
the concept of child development and child security in Canada differs considerably from that of developing countries . 
an enabling environment for human development and more particularly children ' s development involves two fundamental concepts : human development and human security . 
the two concepts are mutually reinforcing , although distinct . 
while they are not synonymous , together human security and human development address the twin objectives of freedom from fear and freedom from want . 
people ' s freedom to act can be constrained by both fears and for the poorest and the most vulnerable members of society , poverty and insecurity are linked in a vicious circle . 
breaking that cycle requires measures to promote human development through access to reliable employment , education and social services . 
the absence of such guarantees of human security constitutes a powerful barrier to human development regardless of levels of income . 
if people lack confidence in society ' s abilities to protect them , they will have little incentive to invest in the future . 
to build a world that values human security , we must start with concern and action for those who will inherit it . 
the Convention on the Rights of the Child was a beginning , a way for the international community to exercise its role of trust for the world ' s children . 
some years ago , there was a popular French song that said : 
un enfant ç a vous d é croche un r ê ve . 
so , honourable senators , let us indulge and dream . 
share with me the dream that , someday , we can offer all the children of this world what we offer our own children and grandchildren . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator LeBreton , debate adjourned . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . - ( 
honourable Senator Lavoie - Roux ) 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , I rise today to support Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . 
i congratulate the honourable senators who , five years ago already , sat on the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide . 
all their input and their work proved very productive . 
now , we must do what is necessary to ensure that Bill S - 2 is effective and is passed without delay . 
honourable senators , most of us have been in this situation at one time or another in our lives : being at the bedside of a parent , a relative or friend who is very sick and in terrible pain , often within days or hours of their death . 
all we wish is for this individual to live what remains of his or her life in relative comfort , peace and dignity . 
unfortunately , that comfort and dignity is too often denied . 
as a former nurse , I am familiar with the challenges palliative care poses for health professionals . 
all of our training was focussed on getting people better . 
in fact , the entire medical system is built around the concept of curative care . 
we have not learned how to help the dying , and for many of us , death is synonymous with failure . 
as professionals , we are very aware of legal responsibilities , so caution dictates keeping a good distance from death . 
on the personal level , death may terrify us , and we may have trouble dealing with the emotions of patients and their families and accepting the feeling of emptiness that death arouses in us . 
there are so many complex reasons why we feel obliged to maintain life at any cost , even if this is contrary to the patient ' s wishes and detrimental to his or her dignity and peace . 
i welcome and wholeheartedly support Bill S - 2 precisely because it aims to address many of the complex reasons health providers cling to saving lives at all costs . 
confusion exists around criminal liability . 
bill S - 2 aims to clarify existing law and order to ensure that the wishes of patients are honoured in the health care system and that health care professionals have the legal protection and medical standards necessary to focus on respecting their patients ' wishes . 
more specifically , Bill S - 2 clarifies the circumstances wherein the withholding or withdrawal of life - sustaining treatment and the provision of pain control that might shorten life are legally acceptable . 
as a first step , Bill S - 2 spells out , in language easily understood by all , that it is legally acceptable for health care providers to administer medication to patients in sufficient doses to alleviate physical pain , even if that medication may risk shortening the life of that person . 
the bill states that the decision to provide medication is legally acceptable only in cases where the intent is to alleviate physical suffering , but not in cases where the intent is to cause death . 
bill S - 2 makes a clear distinction on the basis of intent - intent to alleviate physical pain versus intent to cause death . 
distinction on the basis of intent forms the basis of our criminal law . 
the distinctions are made continuously in our legal system . 
i do not believe Bill S - 2 opens the door to assisted suicide . 
i do believe , however , that it provides clarification and protection to health care professionals , allowing them to focus on the comfort and dignity of their patients . 
second , bill S - 2 stipulates that there is no criminal responsibility when a caregiver withholds or withdraws life - sustaining treatment , provided that the person , while competent , made a valid request to that end . 
honourable senators , any competent adult in Canada has the right to make decisions concerning his or her life , regardless of whether these decisions are good or bad ones in the eyes of others . 
each of us is free to decide which medical treatments we want or do not want , as well as when and how they will be withdrawn . 
supreme Court Justice John Sopinka expressed this right very succinctly in his judgment in the Rodriguez case , when he wrote : 
to impose medical treatment on one who refuses it constitutes battery , and our common law has recognized the right to demand that medical treatment which would extend life be withheld or withdrawn . 
here again , Bill S - 2 simply clarifies the circumstances in which medical decisions are legal . 
the rights and principles at issue are currently enshrined in our legal system . 
bill S - 2 then provides who may request that medical treatment may be withheld or withdrawn , on behalf of a patient who is unable to make the decision . 
honourable senators , it is not enough to clarify the legal context of medical decisions , far from it . 
third , Bill S - 2 calls on the Minister of Health and his provincial counterparts to establish national guidelines on palliative care and the withholding and withdrawal of life - sustaining treatment . 
these guidelines are essential to the establishment of acceptable medical practice in this area . 
our society is ill at ease with death . 
we are afraid of it . 
we do not like to talk openly about it and come to terms with its meaning . 
why should it be otherwise for caregivers ? 
why should we expect them to have innate abilities in the face of death , simply because of their profession ? 
bill S - 2 also requires health professionals receive better training in palliative care , learn how and when to control pain and interrupt life - sustaining treatment . 
they must learn to manage the difficulties and emotions generated by terminal illness . 
bill S - 2 reinforces the legal and social contexts of these medical decisions . 
i think that Bill S - 2 can go a long way toward having the wishes and needs of patients respected in the health care system so that their comfort and dignity may be protected , toward keeping the preservation of life the goal of health care professionals , but we must give the patients and those near to them the right to decide what best suits them when death is near . 
honourable senators , every family in Canada is affected by this issue . 
we all know someone who has seen a dear one suffer needlessly and whose wishes were not respected because the caregiver was not familiar with palliative care or feared legal prosecution . 
bill S - 2 will be welcomed by both health professionals and Canadian families . 
i congratulate Senator Carstairs and wish the committee that will study this issue successful deliberations . 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , it is not our intention to delay this bill , but according to my information Senator Lavoie - Roux will be in attendance here next week . 
i think we owe her the opportunity to address this matter . 
therefore , I will adjourn the debate in Senator Lavoie - Roux ' s name . 
on motion of Senator DeWare , for Senator Lavoie - Roux , debate adjourned . 
international Search or Seizure Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
( 1540 ) 
that bill was originally introduced by my hon. colleague , Senator Beaudoin , on March 3 , during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
it died on the Order Paper in September , before second reading . 
honourable senators , in 1982 , our country developed a powerful tool to protect Canadians from excessive interference by the State in their private lives . 
that tool is the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
section 32 of the Charter provides : 
( 1 ) This Charter applies 
( a ) to the Parliament and government of Canada in respect of all matters within the authority of Parliament including all matters relating to the Yukon Territory and Northwest Territories ; and 
( b ) to the legislature and government of each province in respect of all matters within the authority of the legislature of each province . 
section 8 of the Charter provides that every Canadian has the right to be secure against unreasonable search and seizure . 
the primary purpose of Bill S - 4 is to clarify an important question of law with respect to the application of section 8 . Clause 3 of Bill S - 4 reads as follows : 
before making a request to a foreign or international authority or organization for a search or seizure outside Canada for the purpose of an investigation of an offence , a competent authority shall apply to a judge or justice for an order authorizing the request . 
the purpose of this provision is to protect individuals in Canada against unreasonable search and seizure outside Canada . 
when a citizen is the subject of an investigation into a alleged offence under a federal statute , the attorney general concerned will have to obtain the prior authorization of a judge as is required in the case of an investigation within Canada . 
this must be done before any letter is sent requesting the assistance of authorities in another country with the seizure of documents in their country . 
honourable senators , this bill is based on the conclusions of the Supreme Court of Canada in Schreiber . 
the facts in that case were as follows . 
the respondent , a Canadian citizen , resided in Canada as well as in Europe , and had accounts with the Swiss Banking Corporation in Zurich . 
the Swiss government accepted the letter of request and an order was issued for the seizure of documents and files concerning the respondent ' s accounts . 
no search warrant or any other legal authorization had been obtained in Canada before the letter of request was sent . 
the Federal Court and the Federal Court of Appeal gave an affirmative response to this . 
the case was appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada . 
on May 28 , 1998 , the Chief Justice of the highest court in the land , Antonio Lamer , and Madam Justice Claire L ' Heureux - Dub é responded in the negative to the question of law raised by Karl H . Schreiber . 
according to the Chief Justice , a court order calling for the seizure of banking documents , issued by the Minister of Justice of Canada , and sent to the Swiss authorities , does not involve any provisions of the Charter . 
the letter of request did not , therefore , contravene section 8 of the Charter or Schreiber ' s rights . 
chief Justice Lamer wrote the following in paragraph 24 of his judgment : 
a person who has property or records in a foreign state runs a risk that a search will be carried out in accordance with the laws of that state . 
he cannot " reasonably expect " that this will not happen , if the laws of the state clearly permit it . 
speaking for the majority , Madam Justice L ' Heureux - Dub é was also of the opinion that the Charter did not apply to a foreign government . 
in the case at bar , the actions of the Swiss authorities were not therefore subject to section 8 . As well , it did not apply to the letter of request , because Canada did not proceed to search and seizure . 
in their dissenting opinion , Justices Frank Iacobucci and Charles D . Gonthier agreed that the Swiss government was not subject to the provisions of the Charter . 
they nevertheless felt that Mr. Schreiber had a reasonable expectation of privacy . 
Canadian authorities should therefore have obtained a warrant before sending the letter of request to the Swiss authorities . 
the minority therefore concluded that section 8 of the Charter applied in the case of Schreiber . 
accordingly , the seizure of bank records requested by the Department of Justice without prior authorization infringed on Mr. Schreiber ' s right to privacy . 
honourable senators , a number of you have expressed reserves as to the scope of the provisions of the former Bill S - 24 . 
some believe it will impose the provisions of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms in matters pertaining to privacy on other countries in requests for assistance in criminal investigations . 
i would reassure you immediately . 
this bill does not apply extraterritorially . 
to convince you of the fact , we must first return to the principles guiding the application of section 8 of the Charter in criminal investigations . 
since 1982 , the Supreme Court of Canada has set out in a number of decisions the principles defining the scope of section 8 and the way in which it is to be applied . 
in Schreiber , Mr. Justice Frank Iacobucci stated that section 8 provided very few clues as to the scope and object of the interests it was intended to protect . 
in 1984 , in Hunter v. Southam Inc. , Mr. Justice Brian Dickson defined for the first time the object of section 8 . It involved the protection afforded persons against unjustified intrusions by the State in their private life . 
however , the scope of this right was limited by the reasonable nature of a person ' s expectation of respect of his privacy in the circumstances of a given matter . 
Mr. Justice Dickson explained this approach in Hunter , at pages 159 and 160 , in these words : 
the guarantee of security from unreasonable search and seizure only protects a reasonable expectation . 
this limitation on the right guaranteed by section 8 , whether it is expressed negatively as freedom from " unreasonable " search and seizure , or positively as an entitlement to a " reasonable " expectation of privacy , indicates that an assessment must be made as to whether in a particular situation the public ' s interest in being left alone by government must give way to the government ' s interest in intruding on the individual ' s privacy in order to advance its goals , notably those of law enforcement . 
therefore , since the Hunter case , the notion of " reasonable expectation of privacy " has been the structural principle used to determine whether section 8 applies and protects the rights of a person in a given situation . 
second , in a number of cases , the Supreme Court interpreted section 8 as having the effect of protecting people and not places or things . 
this principle marked a major change in the object of the right to privacy . 
that interpretation of section 8 was restricted neither by the notion of property nor by the applicable right regarding trespassing . 
in 1993 , this led the Supreme Court to conclude , in R . v. Plant , that a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy regarding a set of personal biographical information possessed by others about him or her . 
justice John Sopinka , speaking for the majority , said on page 293 , and I quote : 
- in order for constitutional protection to be extended , the information seized must be of a " personal and confidential " nature . 
in fostering the underlying values of dignity , integrity and autonomy , it is fitting that s . 8 of the Charter should seek to protect a biographical core of personal information which individuals in a free and democratic society would wish to maintain and control from dissemination to the state . 
this would include information which tends to reveal intimate details of the lifestyle and personal choices of the individual . 
it therefore seems clear , according to the court , that the primary object of the right to privacy is the effect of an unreasonable search or seizure on an individual . 
where the search or seizure took place is of no importance . 
in Hunter , the Supreme Court ruled that section 8 had the effect of protecting privacy rights before the fact . 
it must not be used , after the fact , to justify or condemn intrusions by the government into the private life of an individual . 
in that sense , it has given section 8 an interpretation based on its principle , so that it constitutes more than a mere prohibition against unreasonable search and seizure . 
as JusticeGerard La Forest explained in 1998 in R . v. Dyment , if an individual ' s right to privacy must be protected , we cannot defend this right only after it has been violated . 
this is inherent in the notion of protection against unreasonable search and seizure . 
honourable senators , as you know , everyone attaches great importance to his privacy and the means of protecting it . 
the nature of privacy is such that , once it is invaded , it can rarely be fully restored . 
it therefore follows that , for section 8 to effectively protect an individual ' s reasonable expectation of respect for his privacy , it must produce its effect before the execution of the search or seizure and before the disclosure of the information . 
without this protection , it would have very little value as a guarantee of the right to privacy , if it were relied on only to exclude , after the fact , information unreasonably obtained . 
that interpretation of section 8 took concrete form in the requirement for preauthorization by the judiciary , as set out by Dickson J . in Hunter . 
in his judgment , he stated that the court ought initially to weigh its decision , taking into account the right to privacy of the individual and the interests of the State in application of the law . 
it then became necessary to determine the point at which the court ought to give this authorization . 
the purpose of this was to prevent unjustified search and seizure before it occurred . 
this could only be possible with a system for preauthorization before the seizure , not through validation subsequently . 
consequently , according to the highest court in the land , section 8 then becomes involved . 
the right of the individual to respect of his privacy and the right of the State to apply the law are counterbalanced by application of the process of prior judiciary authorization in advance of the planned search or seizure . 
honourable senators , the courts have also looked at the notion of unreasonable under section 8 . For search or seizure to be considered reasonable rather than unreasonable , it must , according to the Supreme Court of Canada in Hunter , 1984 : 
be authorized in advance by a neutral and impartial individual acting in a judicious manner ; be based on reasonable and probable grounds , not just suspicion , and be carried out in a reasonable manner , as opposed to an unreasonable one . 
Mr. Justice Antonio Lamer gave , in 1987 , in R . v. Collins , three other conditions that must be met under the law for a search conducted without a warrant will not be considered unreasonable under section 8 : 
be authorized by the law ; the enabling law itself must not be unreasonable ; and the search must not have been carried out in an unreasonable manner . 
thus , a search or seizure that is deemed unreasonable cannot be easily justified as reasonable under section 1 of the Charter . 
up to now , the courts have made a distinction between seizure in criminal matters and seizure in administrative matters . 
the criterion in Hunter stated earlier applies rigorously to seizure in the case of criminal matters . 
the Supreme Court also stated in its decision in McKinlay Transport in 1990 , that the greater the infringement of the right to privacy , the more the guarantees in the decision in Hunter must be respected . 
in Schreiber , Justices Gonthier and Iacobucci expressed a dissenting opinion , as I mentioned earlier , being of the opinion that the seizure of bank records outside Canada without judicial preauthorization violated the right to protection of privacy . 
in reaching this conclusion , Mr. Justice Iacobucci used a broad and liberal interpretation of section 8 of the Charter , as I explained earlier . 
to determine whether the letter requesting assistance contravened the provisions of section 8 , he used the guidelines set out in Plant by Mr. Justice Sopinka . 
their aim was to determine whether a person involved had , with respect to certain information , a reasonable expectation of privacy entitling him to the protection of section 8 . At page 293 of the decision , he wrote , and I quote : 
consideration of such factors as the nature of the information itself , the nature of the relationship between the party releasing the information and the party claiming its confidentiality , the place where the information was obtained , the manner in which it was obtained and the seriousness of the crime being investigated allow for a balancing of the societal interests in protecting individual dignity , integrity and autonomy with effective law enforcement 
a number of principles may be taken from this interpretation of the application of section 8 . First , the authorities responsible for implementing the legislation must be sensitive to an individual ' s right to privacy , in connection with personal biographical information pertaining to him . 
the existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy calls into play the guarantees provided by section 8 . When such an expectation exists and is threatened by a proposed intrusion by government , the authorities charged with applying the law are required to obtain judicial preauthorization before acting . 
using the contextual framework developed by Mr. Justice Sopinka in Plant , Mr. Justice Iacobucci concluded that the respondent had indeed such expectation regarding his Swiss banking records . 
these documents included personal details about the person , including his financial situation and personal decisions regarding his lifestyle . 
second , the relation that exists between a bank and his customer is a relationship of trust which , under Plant , generates a higher expectation of privacy regarding the information involved . 
finally , if the information involved is easily accessible without intrusion or without the help of a third party , there would then be less risk of a breach of the privacy of the person concerned . 
in this case , the information had to be obtained by intrusion in the Swiss bank and with the help of a third party , which tends to indicate that the respondent had a reasonable expectation of privacy regarding that information . 
moreover , as Mr. Justice Iacobucci explained in paragraph 56 of Schreiber , and I quote : 
the search and seizure was initiated by the Government of Canada by formal request to the Government of Switzerland in the absence of a treaty . 
the request was in furtherance of a Canadian investigation presumably leading to prosecution of a Canadian in Canada for an alleged violation of the Canadian Criminal Code . 
the right to privacy , as it has been interpreted under the Charter , protects people and not places . 
the impact on the individual of a search and seizure of bank records is the same whether the search and seizure took place in Canada or in Switzerland . 
the respondent has a reasonable expectation of privacy with respect to banking information no matter where the accounts are held . 
it is entirely reasonable , in my view , that the respondent should expect that Canadian authorities will not be able to request the assistance of Swiss authorities in obtaining his Swiss bank records without first obtaining some form of judicial preauthorization in Canada . 
the judge therefore responded to the question raised by Schreiber in the affirmative and recommended corrections be made to Canadian legislation to correct this unclear point . 
that is exactly what Bill S - 4 is intended to do . 
moreover , Justices Wetston of the Federal Court and Linden of the Federal Court of Appeal reached the same conclusions as the dissident Justices of the Supreme Court in Schreiber . 
honourable senators , it is clear that each case is unique . 
this is why clause 4 of Bill S - 4 calls for the competent authority , who may hear the application ex parte , to be satisfied that it meets the standards established under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
if this is the case , he may make an order authorizing the request to be made as stipulated in clause 5 of the bill . 
honourable senators , before the presentation of other clauses of my bill , I would like to address the matter of its extraterritorial application . 
in Schreiber , the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court referred to extraterritorial application of the Charter . 
in so doing , he made use of the Terry and Harrer decisions , which clearly stated the proposition that the Charter did not apply outside Canada . 
these two cases dealt with the conduct of American authorities acting in the United States who had taken statements from suspects in a manner which while complying with the American Bill of Rights , was incompatible with the Charter . 
in both cases , the Supreme Court concluded that the Charter could not govern actions by foreign authorities in a foreign country . 
this conclusion is compatible with s . 32 of the Charter , which limits application to " the Parliament and government of Canada " and the " legislature and government of each province " . 
it is also compatible with the principle of international courtesy , as pointed out by Justice Beverley McLachlin in Terry . 
according to her , it was unrealistic to expect foreign authorities to be familiar with the laws of Canada and to observe them . 
honourable senators , in Schreiber , the situation was different . 
already , Justice Wetston of the Federal Court had rejected their submission that to answer the special case in the affirmative would be to apply the Charter extraterritorially . 
he never challenged the privacy legislation of Switzerland or of the government of this country when the bank records were seized . 
what he found fault with was the preparation and transmission of a letter of request by Canadian agents . 
these agents were clearly subject to Canadian law , including the Charter , within Canada and , in most cases , outside Canada . 
section 32 of the Charter clearly applied to them , as representatives of the executive arm of the Government of Canada . 
what is more , because they were Canadians , there was no reason to observe international courtesy . 
they could therefore have been expected to know Canadian law , including the Constitution . 
it was not unreasonable to require that they respect that law . 
this is particularly true of agents who were acting on behalf of the Attorney General and who might therefore have additional responsibilities as a result of the special nature of that duty . 
i would mention that the author of the letter did not have its contents approved by one of her supervisors . 
yet , as I mentioned earlier , this letter clearly stated that the purpose of the request for assistance was to pursue a criminal investigation . 
it might therefore result in charges being laid in Canada against a Canadian citizen . 
in his decision , Justice Wetston concluded at page 944 as follows : 
... if the [ respondent ] can be prosecuted in Canada , I see no reason why he should not be entitled to the corollary benefits of the Charter . 
as a result , he concluded that the respondent had a reasonable expectation of privacy . 
having so held , and having considered the nature of the information seized , he concluded that section 8 required preauthorization by a neutral judicial officer before the letter of request could be sent . 
it is therefore clear that the Charter applies generally to such letters of request . 
some of you will be tempted to say that the letter of request is in no way subject to scrutiny based on section 8 . You would probably use the example of the procedure a Canadian province must follow to obtain the assistance of another province to conduct a search or a seizure . 
currently , the authorities making such a request for help are not obliged to obtain judicial preauthorization pursuant to section 8 before sending their request . 
it does not apply so long as the request is not received , at which point a warrant must be obtained authorizing the search or seizure . 
to that argument , I respond as follows . 
in the Canadian context , authorities presenting a request know that it will receive judicial examination before the search or seizure is conducted . 
in the context of Schreiber , on the other hand , the Court was not told whether the Swiss authorities would have examined the merits of the request to search or seize made by a foreign government . 
we do not know what form such an examination would take . 
however , it was indicated that there was a reasonable expectation that the Swiss authorities would act on the request . 
as Mr. Justice Iacobucci mentioned in paragraph 58 of the Schreiber decision , and I quote : 
it is somewhat formalistic to conclude that the procedure used within Canada to scrutinize interjurisdictional requests for assistance provides a full answer to the present case . 
a formalistic or legalistic approach is contrary to Charter jurisprudence which has long held that the rights that it guarantees must be interpreted generously and in a purposive manner . 
it is more appropriate to approach the issue on a principled basis . 
this result is in accordance with the broad and liberal interpretation consistently applied to s . 8 by this Court in an effort " to secure the citizen ' s right to a reasonable expectation of privacy against governmental encroachments " . 
a failure to apply s . 8 to the letter of request may result in the respondent ' s privacy interests in effect " falling between two stools " . 
i say this because through the international situation at play herein , we have no assurance that judicial pre - authorization has been observed such that one of the cornerstones of the s . 8 approach has been ignored . 
( 1610 ) 
Canadians are protected in Canada by the Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms . 
honourable senators , during the debate on the former Bill S - 24 , a number of you raised the issue of the sizeable costs relating to implementation of these measures . 
judging by previous years , I estimate that this process of judicial preauthorization can be handled properly without any major costs to the federal government . 
according to the figures supplied by the Justice Department , in the affidavit accompanying the brief from the Solicitor General of Canada in Schreiber , Canada had made 79 such requests in 1992 , 80 in 1993 , 137 in 1994 , 109 in 1995 , and 87 in 1996 . 
we have no figures for 1997 and 1998 , but I trust that representatives of the Department of Justice will be able to provide them in time for the committee to have them when examining the bill . 
i wish to stress that Bill S - 24 does not interfere with mutual assistance treaties that bind Canada to other foreign states regarding criminal or administrative investigations . 
canada has signed 16 such treaties . 
let us now look at the definitions found in clause 2 of Bill S - 24 . 
" foreign public official " means a person who holds a legislative , administrative or judicial position of a foreign state , or a person who performs public duties or functions for a foreign state . 
i did not write that definition . 
it is patterned on a definition found in section 2 of the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act , which received Royal Assent on December 10 , 1998 . 
in Bill S - 24 , " competent authority " means the Attorney General of Canada , the Attorney General of a province or any person or authority with responsibility in Canada for the investigation or prosecution of offences . 
that definition is also patterned on a definition found in the Corruption of Foreign Public Officials Act . 
in Bill S - 24 , " offence " means an offence contrary to an Act of Parliament or any regulation made thereunder . 
this bill is therefore restricted to federal laws and regulations . 
the judge varies from province to province . 
the expression " justice " has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Criminal Code . 
finally , the bill is not retroactive . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , Bill S - 4 will ensure that section 8 will be applied when it can help deter a repeat of an unconstitutional behaviour on the part of Canadian agents , even if the conduct of these agents leads another country to provide its assistance . 
under the provisions of the bill , Canada will not be in a position to impose its own procedural standards on other States . 
however , it will ensure that the right to reasonable expectation of privacy is protected if a search is conducted in Canada or abroad at the request of Canadian agents . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Nolin has given us a very thorough legal treatise on what he says is the subject matter of Bill S - 24 . 
i must say that it will take me some time to fully understand what he has said , but do I have a question at this time . 
as I listened to his speech , it seemed to me that , as he described the situation , there is fairly adequate protection provided by the Constitution now . 
i am wondering if the honourable senator could give me a pr é cis of his remarks indicating why Bill S - 24 is required . 
i appreciate that it has taken quite a bit of time and litigation , but the court ' s interpretation of section 8 , judging from his remarks , seems to be a fairly complete right to privacy and protection from abuse of process , at least in terms of the complaint in Schreiber and some of the other cases . 
senator Nolin : 
this question goes directly to the heart of the matter . 
i hope we will be able to send this bill to committee , because that is exactly what we need to study . 
that is also why I cited many cases from the Supreme Court . 
to be fair , the court is contradicting the last 18 years of decisions on section 8 of the Charter . 
it took a long time to decide on various aspects of the protection under section 8 . The court also took great care in deciding that only Canadian authorities would be bound by the Charter . 
however , the dissenting judgment from two judges is more in line with what I am proposing to Parliament , given their analysis of section 8 . 
it is a complex question because it requires this Parliament to decide if the protection in section 8 is protection of the individual or the locus of the action . 
i am suggesting to you , as was suggested by the two dissenting judges in the Schreiber case , that it is the individual , because the Charter protects the individual , not the place where the action is taken . 
there have been many decisions and much case law from the Supreme Court on this over the years , and Schreiber , in my humble opinion , is contradictory . 
i am suggesting that we should correct that . 
in the Schreiber case , to make a complex story simple , the Swiss government is only an agent . 
everyone else involved in that set of facts is Canadian . 
the request was made by the Canadian authorities regarding a Canadian individual for future criminal action in Canada . 
i do not know if I am giving you a proper answer to your question . 
i am sure that you will have a better understanding of this complex situation after you have read my speech . 
i hope this chamber will agree with me that we should send this bill to committee . 
on motion of Senator Cools , debate adjourned . 
privileges , Standing Rules and Orders 
third Report of Committee - Order Withdrawn 
on the Order : 
consideration of the third report of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders ( Senator Kinsella ' s Question of Privilege ) , presented in the Senate on November 24 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Austin , P . C . ) 
hon. Jack Austin : 
consideration was given to this question of privilege at the first meeting of our Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders following a reference from the Senate . 
the third report of the committee sought to put itself in a position to offer an in camera session , if it appeared necessary , to properly investigate the question of privilege . 
a discussion has been held between Dr. Chopra and the clerk of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders , during which Dr. Chopra responded to two questions put to him . 
first , what was his preference with respect to the committee taking testimony from him in camera or in public ; and , second , did he or his union have any concerns with the fact that the question of privilege raised by Senator Kinsella might proceed in the committee at the same time that his grievance was being heard by the Public Service Staff Relations Board . 
Dr. Chopra replied that it was his understanding that the Senate was not a court where normal rules of evidence are followed . 
being a political process , he thought the Senate committee meeting should be open . 
he did not have a problem with the two streams proceeding concurrently . 
he told the clerk it would not serve anyone ' s purpose to have a closed process and that he has nothing to hide . 
he only wants that the committee process be fair to him , that it be open , and that it go as deeply as necessary to resolve the issue . 
apart from replying to the two questions , he also advised that his lawyer would accompany him to any scheduled meeting of the standing Senate committee , and that he was concerned that the department might hound him afterwards . 
honourable senators , as the question in issue was whether the standing committee should proceed in camera , and the witness in question does not have any difficulty in proceeding in an open hearing , I request that the recommendation to hold an in camera hearing contained in the third report be withdrawn , and that this debate be considered terminated . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , is leave granted to withdraw this order ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I am surprised to hear from the chairman of the committee that this is being requested after advice from and consultation with a witness . 
i do not think it is up to a witness to decide how a committee should operate and under what conditions . 
it is up to the committee to make that decision , and up to the witness to accept those conditions . 
it seems to me we have done this in reverse . 
i am most surprised to hear that the chairman is asking that the in camera recommendation be withdrawn - I do not know why it was brought in - after consultation with a witness . 
it is up to the committee to decide how it should proceed , and the witnesses must abide by any decision the committee makes . 
i am not certain that lawyers should accompany witnesses ; however , that is a secondary issue . 
the witness is setting the conditions of his appearance , including whether we should have an open hearing or an in camera hearing . 
that should be a decision of the committee . 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , might I treat that as a question and endeavour to answer it ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I think it is quite proper for the committee to consider the jeopardy in which a witness might put himself or herself in our pursuit of a question of privilege . 
of course , the committee will make the decision . 
however , I think it is eminently fair that the committee should take into account the jeopardy a witness may face and to give that witness notice of how the committee proposes to proceed . 
i think it is also fair that the witness be allowed to advise the standing committee of his views . 
honourable senators , the witness intends to appear , and I believe he may appear before the standing committee on Tuesday next . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask a question of the Honourable Senator Austin . 
during his presentation of the facts , the honourable senator mentioned that the clerk of the committee was told by the witness that the department might " hound him afterwards " . 
what does " hound him afterwards " mean in terms of his employment as a result of appearing before a Senate committee ? 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I am simply quoting what the witness said to the clerk of the committee . 
i do not believe I should supply an answer to that question , as anything I might say would be totally hypothetical . 
i have no further information as to what Dr. Chopra means by that phrase . 
senator Oliver : 
was the honourable senator concerned that it sounded as though he is being intimidated and that he may suffer serious repercussions ? 
senator Austin : 
i thank the honourable senator for assisting me in replying to Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it seems to me he could have been consulted as to whether he thought that an in camera proceeding was appropriate . 
he only found out about it when the motion was moved in the chamber . 
if the witness is suggesting that he will be hounded , surely we should hear more evidence of that than merely the repetition of a phrase that was uttered to the clerk of the committee and the chairman of the committee being unwilling to give us more evidence on the point . 
if we proceed , will we have a witness appear before us who feels he is being threatened , or could be threatened , or that his job could be on the line because of his testimony before a committee of the Senate ? 
is that what will happen next Tuesday ? 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , whatever will happen next Tuesday will happen . 
whatever is put on the record by the witness will be put on the record . 
nothing can be gained by asking hypothetical questions . 
i have , of course , discussed with Senator Kinsella his question of privilege . 
the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s colleagues are members of the committee , including the deputy chair , Senator Grimard . 
they are fully aware of every step being taken here and are supportive of the third report as discussed in committee . 
if the honourable senator ' s colleagues are not to be consulted by me , and I am to consult someone else , then I would appreciate being so advised . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I would thank the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders for the work his committee has done on this issue . 
he and I had the opportunity to have a short exchange a few days ago . 
happily , this will not be a situation in which a committee decides to hold a meeting in camera to hear from an honourable senator who has information germane to the work of the committee . 
otherwise , that senator would be placed in the awkward position of being opposed to committees meeting in camera and yet having to attend or desiring to attend . 
this situation is somewhat hypothetical , but the events as described by Senator Austin are satisfactory to me . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , leave has been granted . 
is it then in order to withdraw the order ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order withdrawn . 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Wilson calling the attention of the Senate to religious freedom in China , in relation to the UN international covenants . - ( 
honourable Senator Austin , P . C . ) 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , on Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , Honourable Senator Lois Wilson called the attention of the Senate to religious freedom in China in relation to the UN International Covenants . 
her comments were based on her own extensive background in religious affairs . 
she has served as the Moderator of the United Church of Canada . 
senator Wilson also based her remarks on a personal visit to China , which she made as a delegate of the Canadian Council of Churches , which visited China between October 23 and November 5 . 
many Canadians in this chamber and throughout Canada have a continuing interest in issues relating to human rights and a particular interest in how such values , which are critical to our own concept of human relationships and social stability , are in fact practised in China . 
the focus on China is inevitable for the simple reason that China ' s population makes up about 23 per cent of the world ' s peoples . 
the value systems and practices of such a large part of the human population is pivotal to establishing a peaceful and progressive human society worldwide . 
there is a clear body of evidence demonstrating that China is concerned to advance human rights practices within Chinese society in order to free the creativity of the Chinese people in the economic and social modernization of China . 
senator Wilson ' s report is , in my experience , a fair , balanced and accurate one on the condition of religious freedom in China . 
in fact , the invitation to the Canadian Council of Churches to visit China and study religious freedom is , in itself , an expression of China ' s willingness to engage in open discussion and constructive dialogue about religious freedom as one of the keystones of human rights . 
as in any society , limits to freedom must be established in order to guarantee that freedom itself can be preserved and enhanced . 
how to find that balance is an eternal paradox . 
one British judge of the last century had to deal with a case where a defendant had called out the word " fire " in a crowded theatre . 
there was no fire , but the theatre patrons panicked and many were injured in the rush to the exits . 
the defence alleged a right of freedom of speech - the right to say anything anywhere regardless of the consequences . 
the judge concluded his judgment with the terse comment that no person could use freedom of speech to deliberately or recklessly speak a falsehood , which a reasonable man could foresee might cause harm to others . 
Chinese ideas of limits to freedom of religion are based on cultural values in historic experiences different from ours . 
the size of China , its vulnerability to domestic dissent , to foreign invasion and to many other factors , give rise to the pragmatism of state authority and family authority in order to achieve peace and order . 
traditions of collective responsibility have been in place for centuries and were , in fact , developed to ensure that safety and survival of the social unit , whether it be family , village , county or province , would endure . 
control of individuals ' behaviour was seen as critical to the safety and well - being of the unit . 
we would recognize this practice in John Stewart Mill ' s dictum for British social policy as the " greatest good for the greatest number . " 
of course , authoritarianism in practice often brings with it the human failing of arbitrariness , which does not have built within it the checks and balances against unfairness , immorality , and abuse of ethical norms and practices . 
while China is far from the most corrupt country in the world , corruption is still a major problem in a society that is in its early stages of transition from a directed economy on the Marxism model to a socialist market economy , which means a market economy of the kind we understand but one still directed in a strategic and regulated sense by five - year plans and performance monitors . 
while there is no doubt that China ' s political system is authoritarian , it is also true that the people of China are better off in their economic and social freedoms than at any time in the last several centuries . 
the Government of China may not use the governance methods of the Canadian system , but it is truly devoted to improving the lives of its people and not just to enriching the group in power , as we see in some other national societies . 
canada has engaged with China on many fronts that demonstrate China ' s increasing commitment to human rights in the individualistic sense in which we understand them . 
we have joint study teams in the area of legal and judicial practice that focus on such values as the burden of proof , the right to stay silent , the independence of the judiciary , and the role of an independent legal counsel system . 
as honourable senators know , the Parliament of Canada in 1998 established the Canada - China Legislative Association with the National People ' s Congress . 
two meetings of parliamentarians have been held , one in China in November , 1998 , attended by 12 Canadian parliamentarians including members of the Senate ; and one when senior members of the National People ' s Congress visited Ottawa , Toronto , Winnipeg and Victoria , to exchange views with federal and provincial legislators . 
topics discussed included legislative practice , the role of our official opposition , limits to government control of the lawmaking process , rules of procedure and so on . 
the Chinese are very interested in understanding us . 
we in turn are interested in their grasp of the idea that adversarial but peaceful debate does not lead to social and political instability but , in fact , enhances that stability . 
honourable senators may not be aware that the Canada - China Joint Committee on Human Rights was established by Foreign Minister Lloyd Axworthy in April 1997 . 
the purpose of the joint committee is to engage each country in an ongoing dialogue on all aspects of human rights with a special attention to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights , which both countries have signed but which await ratification by the National People ' s Congress . 
the specific topics dealt with by the joint committee included rights of women and children , the rights of an accused , new criminal law procedure , bilateral human rights cooperation , international human rights cooperation , minority and indigenous peoples ' rights , and freedom of religion . 
the recent visit to China by Senator Wilson , as leader of the Canadian Religious Freedoms Delegation , was made under the auspices of the joint committee . 
i should mention that the joint committee ' s work is active and ongoing . 
Canadian members of the committee have done field work in Yunnan province , which contains many minority peoples , and Tibet , where the question of religious freedom is an ongoing debate . 
Chinese members have visited Ottawa , Winnipeg and Whitehorse . 
the issue of Falun Gong was discussed at a joint committee meeting in Beijing on November 8 and 9 , 1999 . On November 4 the issue was again discussed by Senator Wilson and her delegation when they met with senior officials at the Chinese Foreign Ministry in Beijing . 
having said all of this , it needs to be understood that there are many issues relating to human rights practices in China which will engage our attention in the months to come . 
social and political unrest in China exists with respect to the vast reforms underway in the Chinese economy , where economic efficiency is rendering millions of Chinese economically redundant , and no social security system of a Canadian kind exists to assist them . 
corruption in China is much resented by the lower economic and social levels . 
the arbitrary behaviour of junior officials , particularly in the Chinese interior , is a cause of dissension . 
there is political unrest in Tibet and in Xinjiang where there is an ethnically Turkish and Moslem minority . 
the Chinese government ' s focus on stability will continue to be given a higher priority than structural reforms of the Chinese political and legal system . 
in summary , over the last 20 years enormous progress has been made in human rights in China , and I am optimistic that the trend line will be positive . 
one great impetus will be given by China ' s accession to the World Trade Organization . 
canada and China signed their agreement on WTO accession in Toronto last Friday , November 26 , in front of the annual meeting of some 250 members of the Canada - China Business Council . 
the WTO is a rules - based system with a dispute settlement process . 
china has clearly signed on to the principle of rule of law . 
the years ahead will see China engaged in understanding and making that concept work . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
i wish to ask the honourable senator a question . 
i was interested in his report that the Chinese are headed for a market economy but with very strong centralized direction . 
the next time that my friend is in China for a meeting of the China - Canada legislative group , will he take it upon himself to caution the Chinese that Canada tried just such a formula under his government in the 1980 s with such initiatives as FIRA and the National Energy Program , and that it was an unmitigated disaster ? 
senator Austin : 
i will treat Senator Murray ' s question as argumentative . 
on motion of Senator Di Nino , debate adjourned . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
notice of Motion to Authorize National Finance Committee to Study Estimates - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lowell Murray , pursuant to notice of December 1 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee present its report no later than March 31 , 2000 . 
motion in Amendment 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I wish to move an amendment to this motion further to a meeting of the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries , yesterday evening . 
this amendment was approved unanimously by all members of the committee : 
that the motion be amended by adding , after the words , " Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 " the following : 
" with the exception of Fisheries and Oceans Votes 1 , 5 and 10 ; 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in the Estimates for Fisheries and Oceans for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee report no later than March 31 , 2000 " . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
this led to a very lively discussion in the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance the other day . 
in our view , even though government votes overall are referred to the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance , nothing prevents another standing Senate committee from having departmental votes that interest it referred to it . 
the members of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance do not want our broader mandate to be in any way watered down . 
i turn the floor over to my colleagues . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a question of Senator Murray , as to the status of the Main Estimates prior to prorogation . 
my understanding is that the items dealing with the Department of Fisheries were with the Fisheries Committee in the last session . 
i am wondering if Senator Murray could explain the apparent change in position . 
i appreciate the chairs have changed , but why the change in position from the last session to this session , particularly in terms of the Fisheries Committee was and its review of the Estimates of the Department of Fisheries . 
the committee wanted to hear evidence from the department and others on a matter of special concern to them . 
also , in relation to past practice , I do not believe it is unique for a portion of the Estimates for a particular department to go to a particular committee . 
certainly in the other place , I understand that is how they deal with the Estimates in a general way . 
i point out our treatment of the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , where certain votes went to joint committees because of the practice of the other place . 
we referred votes relating to official languages and the Library of Parliament to the respective joint committees . 
i would appreciate an answer to that question . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I will try to answer . 
i was chairman of this committee for a year or two a while back , and I have just taken the chair again in this session . 
the tradition in the Senate is to refer the Main Estimates and the Supplementary Estimates , the entire package , to the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
in recent years , because other standing committees have wished to examine the Estimates for the particular departments they are interested in , we have taken it upon ourselves to remove the Estimates of that particular department from the mandate of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
i raised that subject with my colleagues on the committee the other day , and they objected to the practice . 
they objected on two grounds , if I understood them correctly - and I can say that such experienced senators as Senators Cools , Bolduc and Doody were quite firm on this point . 
their first ground was that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance is our Estimates committee and so it is appropriate to send the Estimates , globally , to our committee . 
having done so , they contend that nothing prevents another standing committee from obtaining a mandate from the Senate to concentrate on the Estimates of a particular department . 
their second ground was that , if we take the position that any study of the Estimates of a ministry by another standing committee must be done at the expense of the mandate of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance , then it would not be possible . 
once my motion is passed , even with several amendments , the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry , for example , would not be able to undertake a study of the Estimates of the Department of Agriculture . 
therefore , we should not accept that any standing committee is in any way prevented from undertaking , in depth , the study of Estimates of a particular department by reason of the fact that the Estimates globally have been referred to the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
it might be different if there were some action required on the part of any of us in terms of approving the Estimates or otherwise . 
as the honourable senator knows , there is not . 
we report on the Estimates with our views and recommendations , but we are not called upon to approve the Estimates by voting them . 
senator Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I would like to explain the reasons behind my proposed amendment on behalf of the chair and the members of the committee . 
when Senator Murray moved adjournment of the debate on the motion , I did not rise , because Senator Hays had risen . 
however , if I may , honourable senators , I would like to say that the committee does not want to create any precedents . 
in the First Session of the last Parliament , the Fisheries Committee received an order of reference . 
you will recall that a motion had been passed . 
that is what we actually did , and the minister met with us on three occasions . 
it would be in the interest of the Senate for this committee to consider these estimates and question the minister as to how he is implementing all these programs . 
in the report we submitted last year , the seventh recommendation in this report was that the estimates of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries . 
this report was approved unanimously by this chamber on June 16 . 
the committee is therefore basing its desire to continue considering the estimates of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans on this report and on the motion , which were adopted . 
i wish to assure you that it is not in any way the intention of the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries to interfere in the mandate of another committee . 
i firmly believe that our role would be rather one of helping you as , since you have to consider the estimates of all the departments , you will certainly not have the time to hear evidence from each of the ministers and their officials or advisors . 
the committee has a bit more time to do so , because this involves only one department . 
we did it last year . 
we did a good job , questioning the minister . 
in submitting our report , and one recommendation that was adopted unanimously , we simply wish to continue along the same lines . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I want to clarify exactly what is happening here . 
earlier , Senator Murray said he wanted to adjourn the debate and speak later . 
are we on the debate now or is Senator Murray planning to move adjournment at the end ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Cools , we are presently on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Robichaud . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I was prepared to propose the adjournment of the debate , but as soon as I saw that other senators wanted to continue , I obviously stood down to let the debate continue . 
senator Cools : 
then I think perhaps I should add a few words to the debate . 
it seems to me that we have a few questions here before us . 
they could be described as the larger question and the smaller question . 
the larger question , as Senator Murray has very aptly put it , is the question of the mandate and authority of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance Committee with regard to the Estimates , and the right of that committee to receive the Estimates in total , in whole , in respect of their study . 
i think what Senator Robichaud is essentially claiming is the right or the ability of a committee to ask for a reference from the chamber to study particular votes of the Estimates that are within the particular interest of that individual committee . 
we are looking today at the revival of that reference to study the Main Estimates . 
on March 4 , 1999 , as a result of debate on March 3 , Honourable Senator Carstairs moved that the motion be modified to read : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be authorized to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 with the exception of Fisheries and Oceans Votes 1 , 5 and 10 , Parliament Vote 10 and Privy Council Vote 25 . 
senator Robichaud is , in essence , asking for a revival of that very reference . 
if one were to review the debate on March 3 , one could see that Senator Stewart and Senator Comeau put those requests forth . 
we must resolve this matter . 
it seems clear that it is the larger question as against the smaller question . 
what we have here is a practice of the House of Commons that is surely creeping in to the routine practice of the Senate . 
whereas I have no objection in some instances here and there for some of those votes being referred to some committees , I would not like to see it become a routine practice of this place that as soon as the Estimates arrive here , these various votes are referred to other committees . 
having said that , I await Senator Murray ' s response on this subject . 
it seems to me that that is the issue before us . 
however , the immediate issue , separate from the larger issue , is whether or not Senator Robichaud ' s committee , Fisheries and Oceans , can have those particular votes for study . 
we can settle the larger issue over time . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
the mandates of the committee are very clear . 
as stated in the rules , the only committee to which Estimates are sent is the National Finance Committee . 
there is no reference in the rules to Estimates being sent to any other committee . 
however , what is said in the rules with respect to the committee is that they can study issues generally . 
one would presume that a general study of fisheries from the perspective of government , would clearly have to include the Estimates . 
with all due respect , we perhaps need some clarity on this issue and perhaps a ruling . 
that may cause us problems . 
we certainly got into a problem last week when we tried to refer a bill to two committees at the same time . 
we decided that that was not the right way to go . 
perhaps we do need some clarity in the rules . 
in fact , His Honour may decide that this matter should go to the Rules Committee , that he would prefer not to make that decision himself . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I fully agree with Senator Carstairs . 
i would like to add that rule 86 clearly provides that it is the responsibility of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance to examine national accounts and government finances . 
as for the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries , the rules provide that : 
- on order of the Senate , bills , messages , petitions , inquiries , papers and other matters relating to fisheries generally . 
this is squarely that committee ' s mandate . 
it is the role of the Committee on National Finance to make a comprehensive study of the country ' s financial accounts . 
it is perfectly normal that some committees may take an interest in certain departments that have programs . 
therefore , it is logical to examine these departments ' estimates to know whether the programs do achieve the purpose set out in the act relating to these departments . 
it is appropriate for the Fisheries Committee to move a motion to receive the order of the Senate to conduct a review if such review also includes a financial component relating to that department . 
under the Rules of the Senate , the mandate given to the Committee on National Finance is completely different . 
studies on issues of national interest always involve a financial component , and it is important not to prevent committees from reviewing that component if they so wish . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Murray , you have spoken already . 
is it your intention to move your motion and adjourn the debate ? 
senator Murray : 
your Honour , if you are prepared to rule or to suggest that you will take it under advisement , that will do . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i should like to make a comment , if I may . 
my view is that our practice has been to send Estimates to certain committees . 
i believe we have done it already this session having referred the Official Languages Estimates . 
the Library of Parliament Estimates have also been referred . 
in the past when I was a member of committees , I recall that quite frequently a committee wishing to have a broader mandate would ask to have the Estimates referred to it . 
that left the committee all the scope in the world to study whatever they wanted in that department without a further reference from the Senate . 
it may be that that is not a good practice . 
senators may then question anything they wish with regard to that department . 
under our practices , committees are to study matters referred to them . 
therefore , this is a question that only the Senate can resolve . 
however , the precedent is certainly there . 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , we might clarify this matter in the following way : we could have Senator Robichaud withdraw his motion in amendment ; We could then adopt the motion to refer the Estimates to the Department of National Finance ; we could then ask leave to revert to motions , which would allow Senator Robichaud to move that the Fisheries Estimates be studied by the Fisheries Committee . 
by following that procedure , we would not weaken the mandate of the National Finance Committee , but we would give the authority to the Fisheries Committee to study the Fisheries Estimates . 
i do not know if that is a way out of the dilemma , but it might well be . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I do not see any reason why that cannot be done . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I should like to throw a stick in the spokes . 
the Foreign Affairs Committee also has an interest in this matter , and I propose the adjournment of the debate . 
on motion of Senator Corbin , debate adjourned . 
national Finance 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lowell Murray , pursuant to notice of December 1 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. Lowell Murray , pursuant to notice of December 1 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of the Committee ' s examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
motion agreed to . 
adjournment 
leave Having Been Given to Revert to Government Notices of Motions : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Monday next , December 6 , 1999 , at 4 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Monday , December 6 , 1999 at 4 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 16 
Monday , December 6 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
national Day of Remembrance 
tenth Anniversary of Tragedy at L 'É cole Polytechnique 
Nova Scotia 
eighty - second Anniversary of Halifax Explosion 
statistics Canada 
census Records - Canadian as Ethnic Origin - Effect on Marketing Possibilities 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee on Subject Matter of Part 1 Tabled 
report of Committee on Subject Matter of Parts 2 to 5 Tabled 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Heath Care System 
human Rights and Multi - Ethnic Conflicts 
notice of Inquiry 
census Records 
presentation of Petition 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
east Timor - Status of Sea King Helicopters 
justice 
possible Amendments to Criminal Code Involving Criminal Harassment - Influence of Bill S - 6 
transport 
regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
shutdown of InterCanadian Airlines - Service to Small Communities 
regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
international Trade 
collapse of World Trade Organization Discussions - Agricultural Subsidies of Member States - Assistance to Canadian Farmers 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
health 
authority for Regulating Substances Entering Rendering Plants - Government Policy 
business of the Senate 
point of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading 
referred to Committee 
motion to Instruct Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee to Divide Bill into Two Bills - Debate Adjourned 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee - Debate Adjourned 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
the SENATE 
Monday , December 6 , 1999 
the Senate met at 4:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
national Day of Remembrance 
tenth Anniversary of Tragedy at L 'É cole Polytechnique 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , when I came in to work today , it was enormously sad to reflect that 10 years have gone by since 14 women students were shot to death by a deranged gunman during an ordinary afternoon in L 'É cole polytechnique at the University of Montreal . 
honourable senators , as I stand here today , it is particularly painful to know that in spite of the shock , the revulsion , the widespread publicity and awareness that has flowed from this dreadful event , violence against women and children continues to grow in our country and around the world . 
at least 51 per cent of all Canadian women since the age of 16 have experienced at least one incident of what our Criminal Code defines as physical or sexual violence , and sexual assaults account for almost one in ten violent crimes . 
we have moved ahead in the last decade thanks to many champions now in this house on both sides , in particular women such as Senator Sheila Finestone , a former minister responsible for the status of women . 
we have also moved ahead thanks to a growing number of male colleagues and friends in this country who have rallied to support this mission to end the violence . 
we have changed laws . 
public awareness campaigns carry on continuously , supported and encouraged by this official National Day of Remembrance . 
however , honourable senators , in my view , we still have not succeeded in a meaningful way to eradicate the breeding ground of intolerance , poverty , lack of self - worth and human understanding on which violence thrives . 
they were picked out because they were women , and , even more disturbing to him , he viewed them as feminists . 
over the years , I have supported women like Suzanne Laplante - Edward , the mother of one of the young victims , Anne - Marie ; Heidi Rathjen , a student and friend of many of those killed ; and Wendy Cukier , who helped pull the Coalition for Gun Control together . 
many colleagues in this house have worked together , across party lines , on this important issue . 
it has been a tremendous public crusade , the success of which will ultimately be measured as those attitudes change and the statistics are beaten into retreat . 
progress will be seen , as the family core in our society and the system that supports it find a way to raise children with values of kindness and generosity , not the noise of war and urban violence , and silent acquiescence that the damage done behind closed doors is not the concern of a nation . 
i would love to tell Suzanne Laplante - Edward and all the other family members whose daughters and sisters are commemorated on this day that we are well on our way to success in honouring the memory of their family members . 
we can only do that by finding the resources , the methods and the alliances between men and women in our society to cut through that hatred , frustration and fear . 
honourable senators , we are far , far too slow to rise to that occasion . 
surely we owe it to the memory of the 14 laid to rest in Montreal in 1989 and the thousands of other victims in our society to make that special effort to get the job done now . 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , I , too , rise today as we observe this National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women . 
today marks the tenth anniversary of the Montreal massacre . 
December 6 , 1989 , was a pivotal moment in Canadian history . 
that 20 - minute killing spree has been deemed the worst single - day massacre on record and was Canada ' s darkest day . 
that hateful crime brought much - needed attention to victims of gender - based violence . 
the massacre demonstrated to both males and females alike that violence against women was a real and threatening enigma within a society that prides itself on civility and compassion . 
no longer are Canadians able to pretend that these types of hateful crimes only occur south of the border . 
sadly , violence against women continues to be a fact of life in Canada . 
wives , mothers , daughters , sisters and friends are raped , assaulted and murdered each and every day . 
it is also a fact of life that the perpetrators of these crimes are usually men . 
they are husbands , partners , neighbours and best friends . 
social standing or economic situation does not matter . 
men and women alike must stand up and cry out against this shame . 
these young women who had their whole lives to live deserved so much better . 
today is a day not only to remember them and other victims of violence , but to renew our resolve to put an end to this terrible scourge . 
December 6 , 1999 , deserves national reflection on an epidemic that still plagues our society . 
across the country , events are taking place to honour the 14 women whose lives were snuffed out before their time . 
let us not forget that it is the responsibility of each and every one of us to eliminate violence of any kind anywhere . 
violence , honourable senators , is a societal issue and must be addressed by all of us , whether it be racist violence , domestic violence , child abuse or violence against women , ethnics or gays . 
a new phenomenon has appeared : violence in the schoolyard . 
it is pervasive and very prevalent today and totally unacceptable in a civil society . 
it is a crisis all Canadians must work to eliminate . 
hon. Shirley Maheu : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak today on the tenth anniversary of the sad and infamous tragedy at l 'É cole polytechnique in Montreal . 
we will recall that , on December 6 , 1989 , fourteen young women lost their lives at the hands of one man who had no other goal but to kill women . 
his act of hate wounded all Canadians and changed the way many of us thought about violence against women . 
it is for that reason that , every year since 1991 , we remember this tragedy . 
it is also for that reason that December 6 has been designated National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women . 
the massacre made us realize that many Canadian women were victims of violence and that the situation was intolerable . 
many measures have been taken to resolve the problem , but much remains to be done . 
i also want to say to the parents and friends of Barbara Daigneault , Natalie Croteau , H é l è ne Colgan , Sonia Pelletier , Anne - Marie Lemay , Annie Saint - Arneault , Genevi è ve Bergeron , Maud Haviernick , Michelle Richard , Annie Turcotte , Maryse Leclair , Anne - Marie Edward , Maryse Lagani è re and Barbara Marie Klueznick Widajewicz that they will not be forgotten and that we will do what it takes to prevent such events from ever happening again . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
it is not enough that we just remember these women . 
we must also work to ensure that a tragedy like that never occurs again . 
they had forgotten . 
they said , " Oh , that kind of thing cannot happen in Canada " - but that kind of thing did happen in Canada . 
is life better in Canada today than it was 10 years ago ? 
more particularly , is life better for women , targeted in that attack ? 
certainly we know that the number of female engineering students in Canada has increased dramatically , and that is a positive thing . 
we know that the Montreal police changed their response procedures , and that has led to changes in response procedures in other cities across this country . 
there are remembrance ceremonies on December 6 throughout our country , not just in Montreal , but in my city of Winnipeg and in other cities across Western , Eastern and Atlantic Canada . 
there are days of action to eliminate violence against women . 
there is a men ' s White Ribbon Campaign , and I am very pleased to see so many senators in the chamber today wearing white ribbons . 
all of these are extremely important . 
honourable senators , as many of you are aware , last year the Prairie Action Foundation was launched to fund Resolve , the centre located in Winnipeg . 
that is the type of positive result that should flow from an announcement such as this . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , today we are commemorating a sad and tragic event . 
on December 6 , 1989 , a man , Marc L é pine , killed 14 women . 
he killed them because they were women . 
this terrible deed took place at l 'É cole polytechnique , in Montreal . 
yesterday , a monument was unveiled to honour the victims . 
this tragedy is beyond comprehension . 
we must continue to look at the root causes of that violence . 
this is why we must do our utmost to try to prevent it , first by detecting those who have serious behaviour disorders . 
each level of government must act within its own jurisdiction . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it was ten years ago today , on December 6 , 1989 , that 14 women were murdered at Montreal ' s É cole polytechnique . 
i know I speak for all senators in this place when I say that we remember and empathize with the families and friends of these women , as well as all others who have been marked by this tragedy . 
this sad anniversary is a time for reflection . 
i should like to remind you of the comments made by the Honourable Royce Frith on February 21 , 1990 , and recorded in the Hansard of that day , when he called the attention of the Senate to the issue of violence against women in Canadian society . 
we continue to work towards an end to violence against women . 
i applaud the efforts of several groups who raised our global awareness and who worked to bring about changes . 
i also applaud the efforts of my friends in Parliament who worked to eliminate violence against women by passing the Firearms Act , to eliminate the use of self - induced intoxication as a defence for violent crimes , and to strengthen the Criminal Code provisions on high - risk offenders , and many other provisions . 
i believe Senator Frith was correct when he wondered whether this was not a random isolate act but , rather , an act indicating a deeper social problem . 
the inauguration of the names of the 14 women at the unveiling of the December 6 , 1989 memorial in Montreal yesterday speaks to the issue ' s importance . 
the names carved in steel and stone have been designed in such a way that the viewer must decipher the letters to form the names . 
this is not accidental . 
this was done so that the names of these women become etched in our consciousness and that their story is not forgotten . 
at this milestone in our history , I encourage honourable senators to reflect on the events of December 6 , 1989 , and to do what you can to ensure that we have - and to the extent that we have not , that we strive to have - a society where there is respect and harmony between men and women . 
hon. Marisa Ferretti Barth : 
honourable senators , you can well understand how the memory of this sad event fills me with sadness as a Montrealer . 
December 6 will long remain etched in Canadians ' memories , because it is the day we commemorate , with the deepest sorrow , the tragic deaths of 14 young women who lost their lives in an act of senseless violence . 
on the tenth anniversary of the tragedy that occurred at l 'É cole polytechnique in Montreal , I call upon you all not just to condemn violence , no matter what its origins , but also to reflect on the causes of such a desperate act , an act that shook Canadian and Quebec society . 
i am sure that the 14 É cole polytechnique victims whose memories we honour today would want us to take more direct action to change the course of events . 
for example , we must stop squabbling over the gun control legislation , for the Mini - 14 that was used on them 10 years ago is still not banned . 
it may not be made illegal until January 1 , 2003 . 
we cannot bring the 14 back , but we can act in their name to combat injustice . 
on reflection , we will see that the greatest injustice is that felt by those who believe that society has abandoned them . 
in memory of all the victims of criminal acts , let us seek solutions to poverty , ways to heal suffering and distress , for these are very often what lies behind acts of violence . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , 10 years ago today , at a little past 5 p.m. , a young woman cowered in the student lounge of Montreal ' s É cole polytechnique , holding the seat of a broken chair like a shield in front of her and listening to gunshots down the corridor . 
in the aftermath , Ms Rathjen did something remarkable . 
although she was shy and nervous in front of a crowd , she stood up weeks later , before the Congress of Canadian Engineering Students , and presented a petition calling for a law to forbid civilians from possessing assault weapons like the ones used on her friends . 
these were her words : 
i ' ve talked with the victims ' parents . 
they don ' t want anyone to forget what happened to their daughters and they desperately wish some lasting good could come of this - such as making our society safer . 
after graduation , she took an engineering job at Bell Canada , but then left it six months later to work full - time on gun control . 
with Wendy Cukier , she formed the Coalition for Gun Control and the rest , as they say , is history - a history that also involved this chamber . 
many changes have resulted from Ms Rathjen ' s and Ms Cukier ' s work - certainly gun control legislation . 
today , as we remember the tragic loss of life in Montreal , I think it is fitting to pay tribute to the survivor who made the difference . 
Nova Scotia 
eighty - second Anniversary of Halifax Explosion 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , it is indeed a sad day for Canada . 
i want to associate myself with the remarks that have been made with respect to the tragedy in Montreal ten years ago . 
i also call the attention of the Senate to another very sad event that happened on this date . 
today marks the eighty - second anniversary of the Halifax explosion . 
while seemingly not directly related to war , it was our need for the things of war that brought to our harbour the materials which so tragically affected the lives of so many of our fellow citizens that day . 
the facts of the explosion are well known . 
the Belgian ship Imo and the French munitions ship Mont Blanc collided in the harbour . 
the Mont Blanc ' s deck was crowded with thin drums containing benzol , an extremely flammable material which , when mixed with explosives , became an awful brew . 
fires broke out on board the Mont Blanc and the crew abandoned her . 
naval crewmen from HMCS Niobe and HMS Highflyer tried to put out the fires but to no avail . 
twenty - one minutes later , a little after nine o ' clock in the morning , the Mont Blanc ' s cargo of 2,750 tonnes of explosives ignited , causing the worst man - made explosion in history up to that time . 
the blast was heard as far away as Prince Edward Island and ships at sea felt the waves . 
the old north ends of Halifax and Dartmouth were devastated by a near - nuclear - level blast . 
stoves and furnaces in destroyed houses ignited what remained of the dilapidated structures and blazes raged through the city . 
worse for the homeless and dazed survivors was the freezing blizzard that followed . 
of an urban population of 50,000 , more than 1,600 died and 9,000 were injured . 
some 13,500 buildings were levelled and 6,000 people were left homeless . 
it was an incredible tragedy that is still remembered in our home province . 
a very fitting commemoration of the event took place at sunrise this morning in Halifax . 
i ask honourable senators , as we join in remembering the lives of the women who died on this date so tragically in Montreal , to also remember the tragic loss of the men , women and children in the Halifax explosion . 
statistics Canada 
census Records - Canadian as Ethnic Origin - Effect on Marketing Possibilities 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , on a completely different and much more light - hearted subject , lately I have been learning from the opposition and from Question Period to read my morning papers more thoroughly . 
what I discovered a week ago warrants a statement rather than a question and , in fact , a statement of outrage . 
the National Post reported that a debate is going on in Statistics Canada as to whether census respondents would be allowed to write in " Canadian " as their ethnic background . 
this privilege was granted to us rather grudgingly for the first time in 1991 . 
by 1996 , common sense had prevailed at Statistics Canada and " Canadian " was cited as an example of ethnic origin . 
i suspect that many of us are in the same boat as I am and cannot define our ethnic origins in one word . 
most people whose families have been in this country for more than one generation cannot claim any single ethnic origin , so I need some help from my fellow senators . 
i refuse to accept " mongrel " ! 
my background on my father ' s side is , in alphabetic order , English , German , Irish , Scottish and an always - vaguely - identified lady who I believe was probably M é tis . 
on the other hand , my mother is of " pure " British stock . 
let us not forget that pure British stock is a good mix of Pict and Celt 300 years of Roman occupation that probably accounts for my mother ' s dark hair and her olive complexion - not to mention successive waves of Anglos , Jutes , Saxons , marauding Vikings and conquering Normans . 
two of my grandchildren have European ancestors who came to North America in the early 1600 s . 
fifteen generations of that family have been born and raised on this continent . 
so what are we ? 
chopped liver ? 
how are we to describe ourselves ? 
i believe that we are proud Canadians of typically Canadian mixed heritage . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Milne : 
i say I am a typical Canadian and I say " shame " to Statistics Canada for even considering putting marketing possibilities ahead of allowing Canadians the freedom of choice to describe themselves as they wish . 
shame ! 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee on Subject Matter of Part 1 Tabled 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology which deals with the subject matter of Part 1 of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act , and Statute Revision Act . 
report of Committee on Subject Matter of Parts 2 to 5 Tabled 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology which deals with the subject matter of Parts 2 to 5 of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
transport and Communications 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications be authorized to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Engage Services 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Heath Care System 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Tuesday next , December 7 , 1999 , I will move : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be authorized to examine and report upon the state of the health care system in Canada . 
in particular , the Committee shall be authorized to examine : 
( a ) The fundamental principles on which Canada ' s publicly funded health care system is based ; 
( b ) The historical development of Canada ' s health care system ; 
( c ) Publicly funded health care systems in foreign jurisdictions ; 
( d ) The pressures on and constraints of Canada ' s health care system ; and 
( e ) The role of the federal government in Canada ' s health care system ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 14 , 2001 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit any report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
human Rights and Multi - Ethnic Conflicts 
notice of Inquiry 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Thursday next , December 9 , I will call the attention of the Senate to human rights and multi - ethnic conflicts . 
census Records 
presentation of Petition 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present a petition with 139 signatures collected this past summer by members of the Yarmouth County Historical Society Museum and Archives . 
it reads : 
we the undersigned wish to express our concern over the decision by Statistics Canada not to transfer the 1911 and subsequent census records to National Archives so that they may be released to the public 92 years after the taking of the census as provided for in Section 6 of the Privacy Regulations . 
we wish to have access to ALL census records so that we may continue to use this valuable resource to explore our roots , learn about our ancestors and write about them in family histories for our children and our grandchildren to see . 
we believe this is important for our societal values and will add to our Canadian heritage . 
question PERIOD 
national Defence 
east Timor - Status of Sea King Helicopters 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
one had to land forcibly on the water - involuntarily , I suggest - and another one found itself in some other difficulties . 
can the minister tell us if these two pieces of equipment are now flying , particularly the one involved in the forced landing on water ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the first thing I feel compelled to do is to pay tribute to the skill of the helicopter crew . 
they ran into an operational problem trying to land at sea off East Timor . 
fortunately , they were able to safely land the helicopter . 
after approximately 10 minutes of mechanical adjustment , they took off again and returned to their point of origin . 
the Sea King helicopter , as the honourable senator would well know , is designed to land on water if necessary as easily as it can on land . 
it is known to be quite a stable design for that purpose . 
i would not suggest for a moment that that landing was intentional . 
it was obviously a response to a mechanical problem , and the situation was handled in a very expert manner by the crew . 
it was within the capabilities of the equipment and was resolved relatively quickly under the circumstances . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I would not want to challenge the minister because it might be embarrassing . 
the Sea King is not intended to operate on water . 
it will float , but that is about the best that can be said for it . 
i was not necessarily asking about serviceability . 
these planes would not be flying if they were not serviceable and would not be in the air unless they were being flown by very skilled and dedicated people . 
perhaps I did not put my question clearly . 
can the minister tell me if the particular Sea King is operational ? 
if it is , will it be able to continue its work ? 
has the second Sea King suffered any availability or operational problems during its stay in East Timor ? 
specifically , will the piece of equipment that made the forced landing be able to fly again ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the information I have is that , as the helicopter landed , boats were immediately dispatched from the HMCS Protecteur . 
the aircrew in fact restarted the engine in approximately 10 minutes , took off , and the helicopter was subsequently flown to Dili airport . 
a team of technicians was subsequently sent to the airport , according to information I have , to determine the extent of any damage or the need for any repairs . 
as is the case in any similar flight incident , a flight safety investigation has been initiated . 
at this time , I am not able to indicate to the honourable senator what the result of that investigation was or , in fact , whether it is still ongoing . 
justice 
possible Amendments to Criminal Code Involving Criminal Harassment - Influence of Bill S - 6 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is my understanding that a colleague of the Leader of the Government in the Senate , the Minister of Justice , publicly remarked that it is her intention to see amendments brought to the Criminal Code dealing with the area of criminal harassment . 
we on this side are curious to understand what the policy and intent of the government is in regard to this proposal . 
more specifically , is the minister able to confirm that the Minister of Justice will be incorporating into that government bill the provisions of Bill S - 6 , a bill about which our colleague Senator Oliver and others have expressed great interest ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not have the specific details at this time . 
i am sure the Minister of Justice is aware of Senator Oliver ' s bill . 
as to the exact nature of any legislation which will be brought forward by the minister , I would prefer to wait for her to introduce the bill in Parliament . 
perhaps at that stage I could deliver more information . 
transport 
regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , my question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate is about the policy of the government in the face of the impending monopoly in the air passenger business in this country . 
i understand the Minister of Transport to be saying that he hopes and expects that another company or companies will in due course move into the field and provide competition . 
meanwhile , he expresses his reluctance to re - regulate the field and suggests that there is always a reserve power somewhere in the government in the event of price gouging . 
my question essentially is to know what the state of play is with regard to the government policy . 
surely this is not the last word . 
i do not like regulation any more than anyone else , but we will be in a situation where there is a virtual monopoly in this field for an indefinite period of time . 
that being the case , there will need to be re - regulation . 
the company cannot be allowed to withdraw services wherever it likes , whenever it likes at will , and it cannot be allowed to price its services as it wishes , when it wishes , to the extent it wishes . 
there must be re - regulation if there is a monopoly . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate assure us that the matter of whether or not to regulate the new monopoly is still an open question before the government , and that the government will take its responsibility seriously and not be compliant and offer a weak policy , such as that suggested by Mr. Collenette in his recent media interview ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i would suggest , honourable senators , that the commitment of the government with respect to the topics raised have been clearly stated by the minister , and I have myself repeated the government ' s commitment in this place . 
the situation is still in somewhat of a flux . 
as the honourable senator would know , in a short number of days shareholders of one of the major airlines will be voting on whether to accept an offer that has been put before them . 
therefore , I hesitate to make any comment at this stage that may be viewed as impacting on that decision . 
however , I can say that the minister has clearly set out the five policy objectives of this government , namely , the protection of consumers against price gouging , continued services to small communities , protection of the rights and concerns of employees , maintenance of competition and , of course , effective Canadian control . 
all of these items are commitments by the Minister of Transport and the government . 
at this stage there are still some items in the private sector to be settled , but those principles will not change . 
they will remain the cornerstone of government policy in this area . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the answer of the Leader of the Government and his reminder of those conditions that have been set out by his colleague Mr. Collenette . 
i believe they have read a draft report - a leaked report , perhaps it is a informal report - by a House of Commons committee which makes certain recommendations as to the regime the government should set out . 
we have the President of Air Canada on his feet , telling the government and Parliament what they will accept . 
i am struck by the contrast : the toughness of Air Canada purporting to tell us what they will and will not accept , and the rather compliant and passive attitude of the Minister of Transport . 
nevertheless , we will see in due course . 
senator Boudreau : 
when the minister was asked what steps the government would take to ensure that these policy objectives were met and who would ensure that they were met , he specifically indicated that parliamentarians , the Competition Bureau , the Canadian Transportation Agency , the Minister of Transport , and the Governor in Council would play a role . 
at this stage , both the committee of the Senate and of the House of Commons have looked into this issue . 
i am confident they have both done very good work and that this work will be taken into account by the minister . 
no doubt , the President of Air Canada will wish to express his views , and I am sure that those views will also be taken into account . 
however , the final decisions and the final structure will rest on the principles that I have enunciated to all honourable senators . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , is the Leader of the Government in the Senate saying that we face the possibility of the government returning to a regulated air industry in Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , at this stage a process is underway . 
serious decisions have to be made in the private sector and I think we should let those decisions be made . 
they will be made shortly , and we should not interfere or attempt to influence in any way the decisions that will be made by private citizens exercising their rights as shareholders . 
i am very cautious about that situation . 
however , the government has indicated at this time the general principles on which any policy will be developed . 
i believe it is for the Minister of Transport , at a later date , to indicate exactly how these principles will be put into effect . 
shutdown of InterCanadian Airlines - Service to Small Communities 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , the minister continues to repeat the five principles of his colleague , the Minister of Transport , one of which is service to small communities . 
we have had the shutdown of InterCanadian , which affects small communities in the area from which the honourable senator comes . 
i wonder whether the minister can tell this house how many airports in Atlantic Canada that were previously and solely serviced by InterCanadian are now without service ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for that question . 
i was looking briefly for my notes , but my recollection is that the number is three . 
senator Kinsella : 
would the leader name them ? 
senator Boudreau : 
there are two in New Brunswick , which I am sure the honourable senator is very familiar with , and one in Newfoundland . 
senator Kinsella : 
our colleague the Honourable Senator Cochrane pointed out the other day that Stephenville was one , and in northeastern New Brunswick there are two . 
do the people in Stephenville and northeastern New Brunswick not count in the minds of this government ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , my understanding is that at this time all but those three locations in Atlantic Canada , are being serviced by an alternate carrier . 
those three locations , Stephenville , Newfoundland and Charlo and Chatham , New Brunswick , are being serviced by Air Nova in Bathurst . 
with respect to Stephenville , it is being temporarily served through the centre of Deer Lake , which is approximately 113 kilometres away . 
again , not the best circumstance but hopefully a temporary situation . 
i might say that Stephenville has been problematic in the past with respect to air service , even before the recent events . 
senator Forrestall : 
what about Sydney ? 
regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I have one final supplementary question , to try to bring to a head my concern and for purposes of clarification : 
will the minister assure the Senate that the government will not permit an unregulated monopoly to exist in air passenger travel ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i can say to the honourable senator that the government will protect those interests which have been clearly spelled out by the Minister of Transport in his policy . 
international Trade 
collapse of World Trade Organization Discussions - Agricultural Subsidies of Member States - Assistance to Canadian Farmers 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , in light of the WTO talks collapsing this past weekend and the issue of agriculture being foremost in the minds of some senators in this chamber , I recall that the Minister of Agriculture , the Leader of the Government in the Senate , other ministers and the Prime Minister have said that a key to helping Western Canadian farmers is to eliminate the excessive agriculture subsidies of the Americans and particularly the Europeans . 
it appears now that this goal is a long way from becoming a reality . 
what is the government ' s present fallback position to assist the farmers , and how will it attack the excessive subsidies that exist in the European and American systems ? 
it would appear that there is now no strategy to assist the western farmers . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , it is quite clear to everyone that the results obtained in Seattle with respect to the issue of farm subsidies were not satisfactory and did not make the progress we had hoped . 
however , it would be wrong to conclude that these discussions have come to an end . 
under the auspices of the WTO , discussions to eliminate or deal with the subsidies given by the United States and European Union countries will continue to be addressed . 
we hope that progress can be made , and the fact of the matter is that this subject remains a top priority for the minister and for the government . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I appreciate that the talks are a priority . 
they have been since 1947 . 
my difficulty is that there was an expectation that these talks would produce something that would allow us to see the light of day in five to 10 years . 
this is clearly not the case now . 
even if the talks continue , a satisfactory result will not appear for some time . 
what will the government do to assist the farmers in Saskatchewan in light of the fact that the WTO talks have been stalled and obviously been put back ? 
does this ensure that the government will revisit the assistance and support packages for western farmers today ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I re - emphasize that these discussions will continue under the auspices of the WTO . 
they will continue to receive priority attention from the minister and the government . 
i will say also to the honourable senator that in discussions with the minister , he has indicated that negotiations will continue on the renewal of the joint federal - provincial safety net programs and , hopefully , in ways that will continue to support Canadian farmers . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , will this include addressing transportation issues that are presently pending ? 
will consideration be given to looking at the issue of transportation costs for farmers in Western Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
at this stage , I cannot indicate precisely the nature of the discussions which are taking place between the federal and provincial governments . 
perhaps I might obtain that information and , if possible , share it with the honourable senator . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i would appreciate that information in writing , as I understand that there have been discussions with the railways to cap profits , if I may use that term , or the excess that they are gathering in the transportation of wheat and agricultural products . 
i should like a written answer to the entire transportation policy as it affects Canada . 
senator Boudreau : 
i shall undertake to provide that written reply in such detail as I am able . 
delayed Answer to Oral Question 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 17 , 1999 , by the Honourable Senator Spivak regarding the authority for regulating substances entering rendering plants . 
health 
authority for Regulating Substances Entering Rendering Plants - Government Policy 
( response to question raised by Hon. Mira Spivak on November 17 , 1999 ) 
the federal government does have the authority to regulate the composition of rendered products and the rendering industry . 
in fact , all animal protein meals and fats intended for use in animal feeds are regulated under the federal Feeds Act . 
these rendered products must comply with the standards set out in the Feeds Regulations and must not contain contaminants that would be harmful to animals or pose a risk to food safety . 
rendering plants are inspected annually to verify that they are maintaining the required records , that they have appropriate controls in place to avoid cross - contamination and that they are properly labelling their products . 
for many years , parts of slaughtered domestic animals have been processed for use as high - quality protein sources in livestock feeds . 
in April 1996 , the World Health Organization recommended that all countries impose a ban on the feeding of ruminant meat and bone meal to ruminants . 
this includes cattle , sheep and goats , for example . 
this was part of the process of trying to eliminate all known risk factors in the transmission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) or " mad cow disease . " 
in 1996 , extensive consultations with the affected industries took place in Canada , resulting in a feeding ban being implemented in August 1997 . 
with the introduction of this ban , farmers may no longer use " prohibited materials " as ingredients in ruminant feeds . 
however , farmers can still use these materials in feed for non - ruminant animals , such as poultry and swine . 
canada ' s decision not to include pigs and poultry in the mammalian to ruminant feed ban was based on the fact that there have been no naturally - occurring transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) reported in pigs and poultry . 
the continued use of these products in swine and poultry feeds eliminates any need to incinerate or landfill these products . 
to ensure that the rendering industry is appropriately regulated , the CFIA has initiated a rendering policy review . 
business of the Senate 
point of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call Orders of the Day , I am prepared to rule now on the question raised by the Honourable Senator Corbin with regard to the use of the word " minion " by the Honourable Senator Cools . 
i wish to thank the Honourable Senator Corbin for having brought the matter before the Senate , as the issue of comments made in this house or in the other place about each other or about the Governor General is important . 
as honourable senators , we must always be cautious never to use language that could in any way be considered offensive to persons in other high positions . 
however , I have read carefully the comments of Senator Corbin in this matter . 
he quoted from the Concise Oxford Dictionary , 9 th edition , about the meaning of the word " minion " . 
it is , first , a beloved object , darling or favourite ; a lover or lady love ; also a mistress or paramour ; one specially esteemed or favoured ; a favourite idol or a favourite of the sovereign . 
however , it does say " or servile defendant . " 
most of the statements are complimentary . 
therefore , I would rule that the term " minion " is not an offensive term in its general use . 
however , I repeat that we must be very cautious not to use offensive terms regarding other people or institutions of importance in our country . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
second Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lewis , for the second reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I wish to inform the Senate that if the Honourable Senator Kirby speaks now , his speech will have the effect of closing debate on second reading . 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , my comments today will be very brief for the simple reason that earlier today I tabled two reports from the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology in connection with Bill C - 6 . 
as honourable senators will recall , some two weeks ago this house decided to suspend debate on second reading while the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology considered the subject matter of Bill C - 6 , what we would have called a " pre - study " in the old days . 
the results of the hearings and committee deliberations on that subject matter have been placed in two reports that were tabled in this chamber an hour or so ago . 
i would simply make the observation that one of those two reports recommends amendments to Bill C - 6 that were unanimously passed by the committee earlier today . 
they have the support of all members of the committee . 
it is my hope , therefore , that by closing the debate , completing second reading today and hopefully referring the bill back to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , the committee can meet tomorrow morning to consider the report . 
at that time , with leave of the chamber , it would be my intention to address and begin debate on the amendments . 
honourable senators , rather than get into the subject of the two reports I tabled today , which subject matter I would propose to address as soon as the actual report is before the house tomorrow , with those few remarks about the future process as we see it unfolding , I should like to terminate debate on second reading . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
referred to Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Kirby , bill referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
motion to Instruct Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee to Divide Bill into Two Bills - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I hope you would agree with me that the precedents and authorities hold that the time to move an instruction to a committee is just after the bill has been referred to that committee . 
in that connection , I would draw His Honour ' s attention to motion number 22 standing in my name since November 24 , which is moving an instruction to the standing Senate committee . 
i believe it would be in order to have that brought forward now , and , if it were , I should like to speak to it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , this will be a matter for the Senate to decide . 
Beauchesne ' s is quite clear in this regard , and I refer you to the 6 th edition , paragraph 684 : 
the time for moving an Instruction is immediately after the committal of the bill , or , subsequently , as an independent motion . 
thus , it could be done now , if the Senate so agrees , or it could be done subsequently . 
is it your wish , honourable senators , to proceed now to bring forward the motion standing in the name of the Honourable Senator Murray ? 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I agree completely that we should proceed with the issue that Senator Murray wishes to raise . 
it is absolutely consistent with the essence of the reports that were tabled today , and allowing him to speak now will enable the committee to do its work more thoroughly tomorrow . 
i hope he will proceed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your wish , honourable senators , that we proceed in that manner ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , pursuant to notice of November 24 , 1999 , I move : 
that it be an instruction to the Standing Senate Committee to which Bill C - 6 will be referred : 
that they have the power to divide Bill C - 6 , An Act to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , into two Bills ; the first consisting of Part 1 and Schedule 1 with Titles and a coming into force clause and the second consisting of the remainder of the Bill and Schedules 2 and 3 with Titles ; that any proceedings on the second Bill may stand postponed until after the consideration of the first Bill ; that either Bill may be reported to the Senate as soon as it has been considered ; and that , notwithstanding the usual practice , the Senate give this instruction at any time while the Bill is before the Senate , even after committee consideration of the Bill has commenced . 
honourable senators , a few days ago , when we were discussing in this chamber the progress of Bill C - 6 through the Senate , I gave certain undertakings on behalf of Her Majesty ' s Loyal Opposition . 
i did so with the approval of the leadership on this side . 
essentially , the undertakings were that if there was a disposition on the part of the committee to amend this bill to take account of concerns that have been expressed , notably in the health care sector , that we , for our part , would do everything reasonable to expedite passage of an amended bill so it could be considered by members of the House of Commons in good time before they adjourn for the Christmas recess . 
i rise now to confirm that commitment on our part . 
however , that commitment leaves this motion in some difficulty . 
if I were to press the motion to a debate and eventual vote , it could easily have the effect of delaying the passage of an amended bill through this place and upsetting the commitment that I made earlier . 
therefore , I simply want to say that I do not intend to press it in that way . 
i will make a few remarks on the issue now and suggest that , when I finish , a colleague may wish simply to adjourn the debate . 
this is a serious matter that I raised . 
this bill is really two bills made into one . 
i had somewhere - and may still have them , if I can find them - quotations from the Minister of Justice and later from officials in the Department of Industry in which they confirmed that the bill started out as two bills and ended up as one bill . 
i had intended to place those quotations on the record . 
unfortunately , honourable senators will have to take my word for it because in this mass of paper that I have here , there does not seem to be included the statements that Ms McLellan and the officials from the Department of Industry made when they were before the House of Commons committee on Bill C - 54 . 
Ms McLellan stated very clearly that , while she did not want to divulge any cabinet secrets , it was a fact that she and Mr. Manley had wanted to go forward with two separate bills , but that , for reasons having to do with the management of parliamentary time , it was decided to marry them into a single bill . 
a woman by the name of Stephanie Perrin from the Department of Industry , who has appeared before the House of Commons and more recently the Senate committee , confirmed that beyond any doubt . 
when officials of the Department of Industry were before the Senate committee , I questioned them on this matter but I did not get very far . 
they , of course , wished to put their best foot forward . 
they stated that the entire bill was an integral part of the government ' s legislative framework for e - commerce . 
they glossed over the fact that the privacy provisions of this bill go well beyond e - commerce . 
they apply to personal information collected in the course of commercial activity by any means , electronic or otherwise . 
the fact is that Part 1 is a bill on its own . 
honourable senators , I had a few second thoughts about my motion when a man by the name of Ian Lawson came before the committee . 
he is a lawyer from Vancouver , and an acknowledged expert in privacy matters . 
Mr. Lawson advanced the argument that , constitutionally , Part 1 of the bill depends on Part 2 . I will not tire you with that quote because I do not think I have it either . 
again , however , I ask you to take my word for it . 
as you know , Mr. Tass é is a former deputy minister of justice and a constitutional expert . 
the argument that Mr. Lawson made was , it is not unfair to say , dismissed by Mr. Tass é . 
he explained to us , in his usual cogent and detailed manner , why it is that the whole bill and all of its provisions represent a proper and legitimate exercise of the federal government ' s trade and commerce power . 
i return to the point that I made here at second reading . 
this is really two bills and not one . 
it does not qualify under a proper definition of what an omnibus bill should contain because there is certainly more than one principle contained in this bill . 
we would have one second reading debate , one committee reference , one third reading debate and we would all go home . 
i admit this is reductio ad absurdum , but I hope you see the danger that this kind of practice poses . 
in other words , it is an imposition on the right of Parliament to have a bill with a clearly enunciated principle placed before Parliament so that parliamentarians can debate the principle and the provisions of the bill in relation to that principle . 
from a practical point of view , I expressed the fear , during second reading , that a great deal of attention is being paid to what we think is the more controversial part of this bill , namely , the privacy provisions in Part 1 ; and that insufficient attention is being paid to those parts of the bill that deal with electronic commerce , with the ability of citizens to communicate with the federal government ' s agencies by electronic means , and with the powers under the Canada Evidence Act of the judicial system to operate on the basis of electronic communication . 
these are extremely serious matters , but there was virtually no examination of those aspects of the bill at the House of Commons committee hearings and there was virtually none when the subject matter of the bill was placed before our Senate committee . 
honourable senators , you have only to look at the third report of the Senate ' s Social Affairs Committee , which was tabled earlier , to see what has happened . 
it then says that , " The committee did not receive sufficient evidence on Parts 2 to 5 of the bill in order for it to comment on the specific provisions of these parts . " 
nevertheless , the committee notes that there would appear to be broad support for these parts of the bill . 
well , honourable senators , if it turns out , some months or years down the road , that there were lurking , in the many provisions contained in Parts 2 to 5 , problems that no one had identified or foreseen , then the government and Parliament will look like complete fools when people look back and see and track the progress of this bill first through the cabinet and then the legislative process . 
honourable senators , while I am not pressing forward with my motion , for reasons that I explained earlier , I want colleagues to understand how seriously we on this side view the matter . 
we believe that everything possible should be done to challenge the government when they bring in a billthat is really two bills , as they have done in this case , and they are doing so only as a matter of convenience for the house managers in the other place . 
this is a matter that should have been protested in the most vehement terms by the opposition in the other place if it went by without notice there . 
however , that is another story , and it points , again , to the importance of this chamber as a revising chamber and as a check on the executive . 
on motion of Senator Kirby , debate adjourned . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs ( Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence , with amendments ) presented in the Senate on November 30 , 1999 . 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , as Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , I have the honour to speak to the report on Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another act in consequence . 
it proposes a number of changes to the pardon system under the Criminal Records Act . 
in particular , it would create an exemption to the general rule of non - disclosure of pardoned records for the purpose of screening sex offenders from positions of trust or authority in relation to children or other vulnerable persons . 
the bill is reported back with amendments . 
however , before I explain the amendments , I want to provide with you some background . 
in June of this year , the Solicitor General appeared before the committee to promote the bill , then known as Bill C - 69 . 
throughout that meeting and the others that followed , it became clear to your committee that there were several problems with the bill as drafted . 
on behalf of the committee , I sent a letter to the Solicitor General citing our concerns , namely , that we were troubled by the lack of any express reference to the intent of the bill to pertain to records of pardoned sexual offences . 
we were also concerned that certain substantial elements of the bill would be placed in the regulations to the bill . 
during our deliberations , we also wrangled with the underlying policy considerations of the bill and wondered whether we would be creating a fundamental change to the pardon system , something that has been championed by several of our predecessors in this chamber . 
i also raised this matter in my letter to the Solicitor General . 
i never hesitate to give credit where credit is due , and I must tell you , honourable senators , that the work of your committee was greatly aided by the cooperation of the Solicitor General . 
not only did he promptly reply to our letter , but he and his officials addressed all of our concerns and prepared suggested amendments in short order . 
as we did not have time to make these changes in the previous session , officials from the Solicitor General ' s office appeared before us last week to discuss this bill once more and to present the committee with proposed amendments to the bill to address our concerns . 
on behalf of the committee , I thank the Solicitor General and his officials for their attentiveness to our concerns and for their assistance in responding to them with proposed improvements to the bill . 
the bill is reported back with the following principal amendments . 
first , the definitions of " children " and " vulnerable persons " are moved from the regulations and placed into the body of the bill . 
the committee noted that the use of the term " handicap " is no longer acceptable in today ' s society . 
it is no longer the practice to use the term in legislation . 
second , the word " sexual " was added to clause 6 of the bill in order to make it clear that it is only sexual offences that would be flagged under the proposed system . 
third , the schedule of sexual offences was removed from the regulations and placed in the bill itself . 
honourable senators , this is certainly not the first time - nor , I am sure , will it be the last - that we have improved legislation from the other place . 
the changes made by your committee to Bill C - 7 have ensured a clear , narrow and limited exception to the Criminal Records Act . 
these changes have maintained the balance between the rehabilitative objectives of the pardon system and the need to protect children and other vulnerable groups in society . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I certainly support Senator Milne ' s comments . 
i applaud the excellent work carried out by the committee members in their scrutiny of this bill . 
i support the amendments . 
however , I want to put two issues on the record . 
the Criminal Records Act , as it is being amended regarding pardons , represents the first massive intrusion into an issue that the public previously understood clearly to mean that a pardon , once granted , disallowed one ' s past record from being used against them in any way . 
i recall , as a young solicitor , that it took some time for the public to understand what the pardon system was all about . 
however , I must nonetheless sound some concern about the integrity of the pardon process . 
throughout the hearing , the minister and officials indicated that they were well aware that this act would be an intrusion into the pardon system and that it could potentially lessen or undermine the entire pardon process . 
they countered with the claim that effective control mechanisms would be used by the police , who would be in charge of the system . 
while I have the highest respect for the police services in Canada , it is incumbent upon this government to ensure systematic and effective scrutiny of the police control processes . 
we recently heard assurances , regarding the Elections Act , that privacy would be maintained in that system . 
yet , through some inadvertence , all the records of Manitoba drivers have gone missing . 
it would be intolerable if the pardon system did not retain its integrity . 
it would be unconscionable not to scrutinize and maintain the flagging system . 
it must be used only for checking the criminal records of those involved in sexual offences . 
my concern is that systems decay over time . 
those in charge of this system , perhaps in a time of short resources , may take shortcuts that would endanger the integrity of the system . 
once this pardon system is open , will there be a tendency to open it further for additional purposes ? 
the stated purpose in this case is laudable , but it should be an exceptional instance and there should be no other similar pieces of legislation brought forward . 
Ms Paddy Bowen , the executive director of Volunteer Canada , testified before the Legal Committee during the last session . 
she stated that the most important thing she could say was that , in the opinion of Volunteer Canada and based on research , screening is not the same as doing a police record check . 
she said that , in fact , there is a limited utility to doing police record checks because the vast majority of people who will perpetrate abuse against a child or another person have never been convicted of a crime . 
thus , they are not in the police records system . 
we have had a tendency , over the last number of years , to pass legislation that lulls the public into believing that somehow the ill which we were trying to correct has abated . 
volunteer Canada and many other witnesses before the committee stated that screening is the issue and not police checks . 
very few of the people who are abusing children or who seek out employment where they will have the opportunity to abuse children already have a criminal record . 
they have been devious and have avoided the criminal system thus far . 
in such cases , a police check is of little benefit . 
i trust that the government , in highlighting this bill , will take the extra opportunity to ensure that it protects children . 
i must pay tribute to Volunteer Canada for their screening procedures , as well as other major groups , such as the Boy Scouts of Canada , that work with young people and have set in place valuable screening processes . 
children will be protected if there is an adherence to screening processes . 
with these two comments , I support the bill as it is amended . 
however , I sound some caution about intruding into the pardon service . 
i sound the caution to the government that this act will not eliminate children being molested by those who seek out work in areas where children could be vulnerable . 
i believe that the government and the citizens of Canada have a responsibility to be ever alert for children and that this bill is only one small tool in assisting them . 
on motion of Senator Nolin , debated adjourned . 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , I should like the consideration of the fourth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs to stand in my name . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreed that the item stand in the name of the Honourable Senator Stollery ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 17 
Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
his EXCELLENCY MR. FAR È S BOUEZ 
Lebanon - Member of Parliament for Kesrouan 
human rights 
Sudan Peace Process 
violence Against Gays and Lesbians 
canada - United States Relations 
problems at Border Crossings 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Unilingual English 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee 
bill Referred to Foreign Affairs Committee 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee 
adjournment 
canada - United States Interparliamentary Group 
can / Am Border Trade Alliance Conference - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
appointment as Honorary Officer of the Senate - Felicitations on Retirement 
pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons 
question PERIOD 
transport 
possible Takeover of Canadian Airlines by Air Canada - Service to Regional Airports 
treasury Board 
preparation for Year 2000 - Possibility of Hearing by Committee of the Whole 
heritage 
national Hockey League - Possible New Lottery to Support Canadian Teams - Announcement by Minister 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Timing of Announcement by Prime Minister 
labour 
plight of Homeless - Status of Government Strategy 
foreign Affairs 
report of Canadian Council for International Co - operation - Recommendation to Establish Task Force - Government Policy 
plan to Establish Coherent Foreign Aid Policy 
composition of Budget for Foreign Aid 
provision of Foreign Aid Conditional on Human Rights Record - Government Policy 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee Adopted 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Second Reading 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel 
review of Anti - drug Policy 
motion to Form Special Senate Committee - Debate Adjourned 
fisheries 
committee Authorized to Study Matters Related to Its Mandate 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
his EXCELLENCY MR. FAR È S BOUEZ 
Lebanon - Member of Parliament for Kesrouan 
hon. Pierre De Ban é : 
Mr. Bouez is the son of eminent jurist and parliamentarian Nohad Bouez and Mrs. Jacqueline Bouez , n é e Debs . 
he and his wife , Mrs. Zalfa Hraoui , are the proud parents of four children , Rhea , Nouhad , Tarek and Andr é a . 
he holds a Master ' s degree in Lebanese law from the Universit é St - Joseph in Beirut , specialized in French law in the Facult é Jean - Moulin , in Lyon , and studied as well at Georgetown University in Washington . 
we are delighted to welcome Mr. Far è s Bouez . 
he arrived in Canada on Sunday , December 5 , and will be with us until the end of the week . 
during his stay in Canada , Mr. Bouez will be meeting with the diplomats at the Department of Foreign Affairs who monitor the situation in the Middle East , as well as senior officials of the Canadian International Development Agency . 
in Parliament , Mr. Bouez also gave a talk to the Middle East Study Group on the situation in the Middle East . 
he will also be speaking this afternoon at the University of Ottawa , where he will be the guest of the Rector , Marcel Hamelin . 
he will also be received by the Speaker of the Senate , the Honourable Gildas Molgat , and will meet with officials of the other House in our Parliament . 
during his visit here , Mr. Bouez will visit Montreal and will be received officially by Mayor Pierre Bourque . 
he will also meet with researchers at the Institute of Strategic Studies . 
he will be received by the Chairman of the Board of the ICAO , Dr. Assad Kotaite , an eminent citizen of the Republic of Lebanon . 
while he is here , Mr. Bouez will meet representatives of the Lebanese Canadian community . 
i would like to mention the exceptional contribution made by this community . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , the three minute period is up . 
does the senator have leave to continue his statement ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator De Ban é : 
honourable senators , the Lebanese community is not only present , but it stands out in all sectors in Canada , be it university education , medicine , law , business or at top levels of the Canadian public service . 
we remember the important role played by two doctors of Lebanese extraction in connection with two premiers of Quebec . 
beyond the geographic distance , which in reality fades with the emergence of the global village , Beirut is as close to us as other Canadian cities . 
thanks to modern telecommunications and Internet technology , our two countries share the same values of democracy , tolerance , liberal economy and religious and cultural pluralism . 
in addition , the presence in Canada of a large Lebanese community solidifies and gives permanency to close relations between our two countries . 
canada strongly supports the independence , sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon . 
it also supports Security Council Resolution 425 and the extension of Lebanese authority over its whole territory . 
last summer , at the Sommet de la Francophonie held in New Brunswick , Canada welcomed the President of the Lebanese Republic . 
we were pleased to note that President Lahoud ' s first visit outside the Middle East took place in Canada . 
incidentally , Lebanon is the only Middle East country that is a full - fledged member of the Francophonie . 
the next Sommet de la Francophonie , which will follow the one held in New Brunswick , will take place in Lebanon , in the year 2001 . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , Lebanon embodies the exemplary values of tolerance , generosity and tenacity . 
it suffered the hardships of a terrible war ignited and fuelled by foreign powers , but it overcame that ordeal thanks to the courage and tenacity of its population . 
it is a model for the whole world . 
i also want to express to the Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament , His Excellency Mr. Nabih Berri , and to the President of the Lebanon - Canada Parliamentary Group , His Excellency Mr. Far è s Bouez , our determination to work in close cooperation with them to strengthen the relations between our two countries . 
human rights 
hon. Calvin Woodrow Ruck : 
honourable senators , over 200 years ago , a great emancipation took place both in the British Empire and in the United States of America , wherein the black male , the black female and black children were physically freed from the shackles of slavery . 
however , in this enlightened age blacks are still judged by the colour of their skin . 
honourable senators , we have come a long way since the days of slavery . 
my ancestors were slaves . 
now , however , we live in a democratic country where many opportunities are available to us . 
the human rights legislation of 1977 has come a long way in terms of assisting visible minority people to engage in the benefits and the things that this great country of ours has to offer , but , as a country , we do have some problems in terms of staying together . 
i have recommended to people that we continue to work together so that individuals are no longer judged by the colour of their skin but by the character of their heart . 
we were supposed to live in areas comprised of " visible minority persons only . " 
human rights legislation rectified that . 
while we have come a long way and there is still a longer way to go , I agree with those who say that Canada is the best country in the world ! 
Sudan Peace Process 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , in the last nine months there have been some important developments in the civil war in Sudan . 
the conflict between the north and the south has not abated , and the capacity for pumping many more barrels of oil has increased since the completion of the pipeline from southern Sudan to Port Said in the north . 
the international community , including Canada , has made monies available to support a small four - person secretariat based in Kenya , under the auspices of the Inter - Governmental Authority on Development , known as IGAD . 
this African initiative , charged with brokering a peace plan , is supported by the International Partners Forum , of which Canada is one . 
on October 26 , 1999 , Canada ' s Foreign Minister announced two appointments - mine , as special envoy to the Sudan peace process , and John Harker ' s , as special advisor on African issues . 
the two appointments are complementary but different in focus , reflecting Canada ' s public policy on Sudan . 
my focus will be on reinvigorating the peace process after wide consultations with Canadian NGOs , academics , the Sudanese community in Canada , and envoys of sister countries that support the mediation process , as well as with the government and the armed opposition of Sudan . 
this week , for example , some of us will meet with Mr. Bethuel Kipligat , a Kenyan civil society leader working on a Track 2 peace process designed to effect reconciliation between leaders of the Sudanese NGO communities of both the north and the south , backed by the Waterloo - based Project Ploughshares and the Montreal - based Alternatives . 
the following week , I will host an Ottawa meeting with Dr. Haruun Ruun and Telar Ring Deng , representatives of the New Sudan Council of Churches , which body includes peace - building and working with IGAD on north - south solutions , as well as coordinating church development work in that war - torn country . 
canada ' s position is that nothing short of a monitored comprehensive peace plan is acceptable . 
the work of reinvigorating the peace process is of a long - term nature ; that is , there is no " quick fix . " 
canada ' s policy is slightly more complex than that of the U.S.A. in that it includes a lively dialogue with Canada ' s private sector . 
if it becomes evident that oil extraction is either exacerbating the conflict in Sudan or resulting in violations of human rights , then consideration will be given to using economic or trade restrictions or other instruments that may be at hand . 
only an accelerated movement towards a just peace will allow all Sudanese to enjoy equitably the benefits of this natural resource . 
that is why Canada has made the two complementary appointments and appears to move at a more measured pace than our neighbour to the south , for example , in attempting to resolve these thorny issues . 
violence Against Gays and Lesbians 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , on November 7 , 1999 , Robert Peterson , a first - year law student at the University of New Brunswick in Fredericton , was brutally attacked while walking home late in the evening . 
the attacker was cowardly and jumped Mr. Peterson from behind , kicking his face repeatedly . 
he spewed hateful , anti - gay slurs at a young man who deserves so much better . 
approximately two weeks later , a similar incident occurred in the same downtown area . 
honourable senators , I rise today in response to a call for action from concerned New Brunswick citizens . 
Robert Peterson is not the first gay or lesbian individual to come face to face with such viciousness in our streets , nor will he be the last - that is , unless we , as a society , stand up and voice our outrage . 
only by speaking out against this type of bigotry and discrimination can we begin to see an end . 
as a Jew , this blatant act of hatred appalls me . 
we should have learned from the horrors of the Holocaust what hatred does to a person , a family , a community and a nation . 
i find this type of racism and discrimination deplorable . 
it is appalling that ignorant people continue to judge their neighbour by race , religion or sexual preference . 
by ignoring the problem , we license them to practise . 
by standing up and saying enough is enough , we are demonstrating our concern for the victims . 
gays and lesbians have the right to feel safe walking home at night as do we all . 
the type of cowardice illustrated by Robert Peterson ' s attacker runs deep , laced with hatred and bigotry . 
Mr. Peterson is now planning on leaving UNB and relocating from the Fredericton area . 
what a shame that an outspoken and brave young man should feel the need to leave his new community and school , all due to ignorance , intolerance and bigotry . 
i applaud his courage to come forward and share the hurt that has been inflicted on him . 
i can only hope that we , as leaders , will set the example for the entire country and show moral leadership by speaking out against these hate crimes . 
canada - United States Relations 
problems at Border Crossings 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , later this day I will table the report of the Canadian delegation to the Fall Conference of the CAN / AM Border Trade Alliance held in Washington , D . C . , from September 12 to 14 , 1999 . Joe Comuzzi , of the other place , and I , as the Canadian co - chairs of the Canada - United States Inter - Parliamentary Group , were invited to speak at this benchmark meeting of important trade stakeholders on both sides of the border . 
honourable senators will know that two - way trade between our two countries now exceeds $ 1.3 billion per day and is growing daily . 
two - way trade has quadrupled in the last decade . 
Unhappily , border - crossing points suffer from traffic jams , gridlock and congestion . 
long , costly delays are the order of the day . 
i estimate there are three levels of government as well as private authorities and at least 17 government agencies on both sides of the border with some governance responsibility for our border - crossing points . 
we can only note a deficit in leadership to renovate this bureaucratic barrier to trade efficiency that clogs our border corridors every day . 
with the advent of " just - in - time " inventory practices and " just - in - time " product delivery exploding because of the Internet , this cancer of gridlock will intensify and metastasize daily . 
the result is that Canadian productivity and competitiveness will continue to suffer . 
to date , there has been no master plan to ease this self - evident and eroding condition . 
rather than political leadership , we encounter bureaucratic avoidance , inefficiencies and - worse - turf wars . 
Joe Comuzzi and I joined members of the U.S. Congress - including Senators Moynihan of New York State , Senator Abraham of Michigan and our old friend and colleague Senator Frank Murkowski of Alaska , co - chair of the Canada - United States Inter - Parliamentary Group - as guest speakers . 
all of us brought home forcefully , each in our own way , the same message . 
our American colleagues have awakened to the problem . 
massive investments in road and real infrastructure has just been allocated by Congress . 
this priority of investment has not been matched by the Canadian side . 
leaders , ministers and ambassadors have yet to meet to work out a common plan to sort out this bureaucratic morass . 
honourable senators , only when our actions match our words will we become a trading nation on the ground as well as in the air . 
hopefully , the millennium will wake up our responsible governments to act on their responsibility to benefit all Canadians . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Unilingual English 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I rise today to express a strong disappointment with what many of us read in today ' s Ottawa Citizen and on the first page of Le Droit . 
i find it surprising and shocking that the capital city of this bilingual country would not have its language duality declared officially in the regional restructuring legislation now before Queen ' s Park . 
what kind of message is sent to Canadians across this land when a freshly - minted capital , the seat of the federal Parliament , still clings to the vestiges of unilingualism ? 
is the provincial government so anxious to impose a massive overhaul of the region yet sublimely indifferent to its francophone component ? 
senator De Ban é : 
shame ! 
senator Poulin : 
surely it would be a simple matter for the Government of Ontario to declare Ottawa a bilingual region , along with the other restructuring recommendations in Mr. Glen Shortliffe ' s admirable report . 
honourable senators , it is much more than a local or provincial issue . 
it is a matter of national pride . 
canada plays a key role on the international scene . 
Ottawa regularly welcomes heads of states from all over the world . 
Ottawa is where ambassadors and their staff work to promote the diplomatic and trade relations of their respective countries with Canada . 
Ottawa is also where the Parliament of Canada and the bulk of the federal public service are located , and it is a place where parliamentarians and public servants can choose to live in English or in French . 
honourable senators , I call upon you to join me in urging the Government of Ontario to rethink its actions and to restore the concept of a new , bilingual capital city of Ottawa , the bilingual capital of Canada , into its current restructuring legislation . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , I wish to add my welcome to that of the Honourable Pierre De Ban é , because I have often met with Minister Bouez and the Ambassador of Lebanon . 
on this day when representatives of a multi - constitutional country are paying a visit to a country that calls itself bilingual and multicultural , it is a pity that the news to which Senator Poulin referred is breaking . 
i will not abuse this privilege today . 
i will come back to this matter . 
you all know what I think of this country and you all know what I think of Ottawa . 
Ottawa is the capital for all Canadians . 
it would be unthinkable for Ottawa to be the national capital and for only one of the two official languages to be spoken there , for French Canadians and other French - speaking Canadians not to be able to say that Ottawa was their capital as well . 
i will not say anything more now because this will be a long debate , but I will return to the subject . 
i am certain that honourable senators wish to join with Senator Poulin and others in saying that something must be done so that Ottawa truly reflects what Canada is all about . 
we say many things around the world , and we should start by reflecting them here in Ottawa , Canada . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
Mr. Bouez is accompanied by His Excellency the Ambassador of Lebanon to Canada . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette , a member of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred the Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
c É LINE HERVIEUX - PAYETTE 
member of the Committee 
bill Referred to Foreign Affairs Committee 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
pursuant to a special order of the Senate moved with leave and adopted on November 24 , and notwithstanding rule 97 ( 4 ) , this bill now stands referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee 
hon. Michael Kirby , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology has the honour to present its 
fourth REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill C - 6 , an Act to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , in obedience to the Order of Reference of Monday , December 6 , 1999 , has examined the said Bill and now reports the same with the following amendments : 
page 3 , Clause 2 : 
add the following after line 2 : 
"" personal health information " , with respect to an individual , whether living or deceased means : 
( a ) information concerning the physical or mental health of the individual ; 
( b ) information concerning any health service provided to the individual ; 
( c ) information concerning the donation by the individual of any body part or any bodily substance of the individual or information derived from the testing or examination of a body part or bodily substance of the individual ; 
( d ) information that is collected in the course of providing health services to the individual ; or 
( e ) information that is collected incidentally to the provision of health services to the individual . " . 
( a ) Add the following after line 4 : 
" ( 1.1 ) 
this Part does not apply to any organization in respect of personal health information that it collects , uses or discloses " ; and 
( d ) Add the following after line 7 : 
" ( 2.1 ) 
subsection ( 1.1 ) 
ceases to have effect one year after the day on which this section comes into force . " . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding 58 ( 1 ) ( g ) , I move that the report be placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration later this day . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to , and bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading later this day . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , December 8 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. ; 
that at 3:30 p.m. tomorrow , if the business of the Senate has not been completed , the Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings to adjourn the Senate ; and 
that all matters on the Orders of the Day on the Notice Paper , which have not been reached , shall retain their position . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
canada - United States Interparliamentary Group 
can / Am Border Trade Alliance Conference - Report of Canadian Delegation Tabled 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to present , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian Delegation to the fall conference of the CAN / AM Border Trade Alliance , held in Washington , D . C . , from September 12 to 14 , 1999 . 
appointment as Honorary Officer of the Senate - Felicitations on Retirement 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I am pleased to move , seconded by the Leader of the Opposition , the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that the Senate desires to record their deep appreciation of the distinguished service rendered by Mr. Richard G . Greene as Deputy Clerk and Principle Clerk , Legislative Services of the Senate ; and 
that in acknowledgement of the dignity , dedication , and profound learning with which he has graced the office , he be designated an Honorary Officer of this House with an entr é e to the Senate and a seat at the Table on occasions of ceremony . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I happily take this occasion to speak for a few minutes in support of this motion . 
this is a bittersweet occasion . 
it is bitter because Richard Greene - I think of him as Senator Greene - will be leaving us as of the end of the year . 
actually , I think of him as exactly who he is - an extraordinary Table officer in this house . 
it is sweet because he is so young . 
i look at him , and I regard him as younger than I am , and for me that is very young . 
even so , Richard has been in this place for a remarkable 44 years . 
i went down the hall to look at the photographs of leaders of the government of this place - unfortunately they do not take pictures of the leaders of the opposition - and the leader at the time Richard joined the Senate was one William Ross Macdonald from Ontario . 
Richard , you have seen eight prime ministers come and go since you started here in the time of Louis St. Laurent . 
honourable senators , Richard Greene is distinctive and distinct in this place and , I am sure , in most records of public service . 
he has made a unique contribution , starting out as a page and becoming the Deputy Clerk . 
Richard , you have served us with extraordinary grace and scholarship , and we thank you for that . 
i am pleased to speak in support of this motion , and I look forward to seeing you on many ceremonial occasions . 
may you have a long and happy retirement . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I am very pleased to rise and enthusiastically second Senator Boudreau ' s motion , if for no other reason than one of selfishness , if not fear . 
i need not remind you that Richard Greene , more than any other staff , sees all , hears all , and at least so far , has said very little , if anything . 
this is particularly significant when you realize that since arriving here in 1956 , he has seen 277 of the 827 senators who have been named since Confederation . 
one - third of them have passed under his scrutiny . 
he has attended to 14 speakers and counselled nine Governors General . 
what a story Richard Greene could tell of his over 40 years here , and how reassuring to know that he is prevented from doing so as long as he is associated with the Senate , even in an honorary position . 
honourable senators , I believe this is reason enough to support the motion without hesitation , and even in indecent haste , no matter how many leaves are required . 
i wish to stress in particular Richard ' s impartiality , despite the fact that at least on this side his political leanings are somewhat suspect . 
indeed , he dispenses convoluted procedural advice equally and without favour . 
the fact is , honourable senators , putting weak humour aside , this place will not be the same when we return next year because a little of the Senate is also leaving with Richard ' s departure . 
he has been too much a part of this place for it not to be otherwise . 
i can only hope that he will also take with him our respect , our gratitude and much affection , for , in the spirit of the Speaker ' s Ruling yesterday , no minion has better served the Senate . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i must advise the Senate that if the Honourable Senator Boudreau speaks now his speech will have the effect of closing debate on the motion . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I should like to associate myself with the remarks by my deputy leader , the distinguished Leader of the Opposition and , as well , with all of the remarks that will be offered privately to Richard . 
i congratulate him and his family and wish them all a very happy , successful , and prosperous retirement . 
we all look forward to seeing you appear here as a very special and honoured guest . 
with that , my role would be to move adoption of the motion . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it was moved by the Honourable Senator Boudreau , seconded by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton : 
that the Senate desires to record their deep appreciation of the distinguished service rendered by Mr. Richard G . Greene as Deputy Clerk and Principal Clerk , Legislative Services of the Senate ; and 
that in acknowledgement of the dignity , dedication and profound learning with which he has graced the office , he be designated an honorary officer of this house with an entree to the Senate and a seat at the Table on occasions of ceremony . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
pages Exchange Program with the House of Commons 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to introduce to you the page from the House of Commons who is on exchange with us this week . 
Julien Morrissette , a native of Ottawa , is a student in the Faculty of Political Science at the University of Ottawa . 
question PERIOD 
transport 
possible Takeover of Canadian Airlines by Air Canada - Service to Regional Airports 
hon. Ethel Cochrane : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government . 
in yesterday ' s Globe and Mail , the Minister of Transport was quoted as saying : 
we believe we ' ve got to create an environment to encourage domestic competition to the new carrier ... 
there is no way we want to go back to the old regime of re - regulation ... 
that is the minister ' s reaction to the imminent takeover of Canadian Airlines by Air Canada . 
the issue is not choosing which airline to fly with ; the issue is whether or not there will still be any airline serving the local airport . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for the question . 
obviously it is a matter of concern , particularly in certain areas of Atlantic Canada . 
Stephenville is a good example , perhaps , of the current problem facing our air transportation sector because this airport has been problematic in the past . 
before the recent events in the air transportation sector , it had been a matter of some concern to provide air service from that particular airport . 
the minister is aware of this situation , and certainly the strong representations from senators and members of the other place , particularly from Atlantic Canada and other small centres , will help to keep that issue firmly before him . 
senator Cochrane : 
honourable senators , where I live is approximately 120 kilometres from Deer Lake . 
however , there are some other communities now without service and people will need to drive approximately 150 kilometres . 
i am thinking about people in communities such as Port aux Basques and Cape St. George on the mainland , and Port au Port Peninsula , who will need to travel much further . 
does the government not realize that a policy of encouraging competition will not get airplanes flying out of Stephenville or Charlo or Chatham , New Brunswick , or any other airports that have been abandoned already by InterCanadian Airlines ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the statement by the minister , I would speculate , was not intended to be comprehensive in nature . 
as a matter of fact , I have mentioned a number of times in this place the basic principles attached to the government ' s policy , and one of them specifically deals with the provision of services to our smaller communities throughout the country . 
the minister has indicated on a number of occasions , both in the House of Commons and publicly elsewhere , that this necessity of ensuring service to small communities across Canada will form an integral part of government policy . 
treasury Board 
preparation for Year 2000 - Possibility of Hearing by Committee of the Whole 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government , though it could be equally directed to the Deputy Leader of the Government . 
it arises out of a question asked of me a few moments ago by our whip . 
senator DeWare asked me where I would be shortly after New Year ' s . 
i said that I would be at home , but that I do have a new number and I gave it to her . 
i said , " Why do you want to know where I will be ? " 
she said , " Oh , in case something goes wrong at midnight on that fateful day . " 
i have a growing apprehension that just possibly the government is not all that certain of how Canada stands with respect to potential Y 2 K problems . 
to that end , in order that our minds might be set to rest , I should like to ask the Leader of the Government in the Senate if he would ask the appropriate ministers , such as the Minister of Defence , together with one or two of their experts , to appear before us briefly in Committee of the Whole prior to the Senate rising for the Christmas break . 
this would allow senators the opportunity to ask questions about the wide range of matters that could be affected . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Minister Robillard , the President of the Treasury Board , is the minister responsible for Y 2 K preparations . 
i am assured that the preparations have been thorough in all essential sectors and that the Government of Canada does not expect any problems with the transition to the new millennium . 
prudence is always a good element of any such program . 
knowing where key people , such as the honourable senator , will be located at all relevant times may be of importance . 
as part of the overall planning , it simply demonstrates a level of prudence . 
however , I do not think it should set off any alarm bells . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I could ask the government whip whether or not he has found it necessary to seek such information . 
if he has , would he give some credence to that possibility ? 
my supplementary question is directed to the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
will he give some consideration to having the appropriate minister and someone from their staff spend 20 minutes or half an hour with us just to give us that reassurance ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I know from previous experience that it is not in order for me to answer a question unless the leader is absent . 
however , in not answering the question , let me take notice of what the honourable senator has said and attempt to deal with it . 
heritage 
national Hockey League - Possible New Lottery to Support Canadian Teams - Announcement by Minister 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , from Y 2 K I go to Sheila Copps , who is a Y 2 K problem of her own . 
we can always hope that she will fail to work after December 31 . 
honourable senators , it was reported recently in The Globe and Mail that Sheila Copps had announced a new plan . 
since the announcement was not made in the other place , could the Leader of the Government in the Senate explain the new plan ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I must indicate to the honourable senator that I have not been present at any meeting where such a plan has been announced . 
therefore , I am afraid I cannot help him with the matter . 
senator Tkachuk : 
that is an honest answer , honourable senators . 
it seems that was the honest answer of the minister in charge of this problem , Minister Manley , who did not have a clue about the announcement either . 
who in the government is in charge of finding a solution to the problem ? 
is it Sheila Copps , the Minister of Canadian Heritage , or is it John Manley , the Minister of Industry ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , there is certainly a level of concern and a shared responsibility among all the members of the executive council . 
certainly , Minister Manley would be the lead minister in this regard . 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , it intrigues me how the government has been dealing lately with national problems . 
yet , Minister Manley has no clue about it . 
the responsible minister does know anything about the plan . 
this does not give me a great deal of confidence in anyone finding a solution to what the NHL teams in Canada have raised as a major problem for them , continuing to do business here . 
if all the ministers and all the members of government are in charge of finding a solution to this plan , it might help us if the minister were to explain the process to us . 
how does one arrive at a solution to a problem such as this ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am sure that this is a matter of concern to all members of the Privy Council . 
perhaps the lesson to be learned in this incident is that one should not always believe everything one reads in The Globe and Mail . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Quebec - Possible Conditions of Referendum - Timing of Announcement by Prime Minister 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , any resolution to discussions which would have taken place , were they to have taken place , would be made public by the Prime Minister in due course . 
i am sure the honourable senator would be aware of that . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I naturally appreciate the reluctance of the Leader of the Government to upstage the Prime Minister on his own announcement . 
can he , however , let us know when we may expect an announcement from the Prime Minister on this matter ? 
senator Boudreau : 
with apologies to the honourable senator , I would be reluctant to guess the Prime Minister ' s timing on an issue so important and so central to him . 
at the risk of accidentally misleading senators , I would beg not to give a direct answer to this question and would prefer to answer using the common phrase , " in the fullness of time . " 
one would hope in the relatively near future that the Prime Minister will come forward with his announcement . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I appreciate that . 
i am not trying to rush things . 
i ask the question simply because there is a possibility , perhaps even a likelihood , that Parliament , which obviously includes the Senate , will be involved . 
what I am trying to get at is whether we should be ready , if not to deal with a matter , at least to take note of an initiative in Parliament before the Christmas recess . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , if the Prime Minister ' s direction is to proceed by way of legislation , then , by necessity , the Senate will have a major role to play . 
as to whether that might interfere with our Christmas celebrations , I am fairly confident that we all will be celebrating Christmas with our families . 
labour 
plight of Homeless - Status of Government Strategy 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate and it concerns the government ' s strategy to fight homelessness . 
it is really a follow - up question to an answer the honourable leader gave in response to a question asked by Senator Cohen on November 23 . 
the government appointed the Minister of Labour to coordinate the government ' s response to the problem of homelessness late last winter . 
at that time , there seemed to be great urgency . 
much concern was expressed and many people were suffering last winter . 
at that time , the minister said she would develop the government ' s strategy within a month . 
honourable senators , what concerns me , given the elapsed time , is the possibility that the strategy may have become bogged down inside government . 
indeed , a report in yesterday ' s Toronto Star , which I am sure the leader has read , suggests just that . 
a government source is quoted as follows : 
we just haven ' t delivered . 
not everyone is happy about it . 
the minister has been working and there are things we can say we ' ve done , but we haven ' t delivered . 
i do not want to rely solely on this article . 
perhaps the government leader could expand on his answer to Senator Cohen of a couple of weeks ago and inform the chamber at what stage the homelessness strategy is and on what basis he said that he expects there will be more to announce shortly . 
" shortly " is always a very strange word here . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the minister responsible has done a remarkable job consulting across the country , travelling and meeting with groups directly involved . 
she has covered a tremendous amount of ground and is very aggressive about putting forward policy positions and programs for this particular group of individuals . 
i can assure the honourable senator that this process has not been stalled . 
the minister is diligently and aggressively pursuing her recommendations . 
as to the timing of any announcements , once again I must say that that will be left with the minister to decide . 
however , I share the senator ' s hope that it will not be delayed for too long . 
senator Robertson : 
honourable senators , I thank the leader for that answer . 
what bothers me is that the government was premature in saying that a strategy would be in place long before now . 
i believe this increased expectation has undermined the government ' s good intentions somewhat and has created confusion for everyone who has an interest in tackling this very serious problem . 
in the same Toronto Star article , the Minister of Finance was quoted as saying that the strategy needs an agreement between the three levels of government to work . 
many honourable senators here , including the government leader and myself , have been involved in negotiating federal - provincial agreements . 
we all know how difficult that is and how long it can take , so who knows when we will get a homelessness strategy . 
now that there must be an agreement between the provinces and the municipalities , we could be looking at two or three years . 
in the meantime many people are suffering . 
could the Leader of the Government in the Senate inform the chamber if negotiations with the provinces have started and what is the timetable ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , other levels of government have a clear responsibility to help deal with this very significant challenge facing us across the country . 
it is clear that they do have a role to play . 
any program the federal government brings forward would not be a substite for the responsibilities that constitutionally fall on the provincial governments and their surrogates , the municipalities . 
i will convey the honourable senator ' s questions to the minister and I will provide as much information and detail as I am able . 
senator Robertson : 
honourable senators , part of the concern of many residents in Canada is that there was no mention of provincial or municipal involvement at the time of the announcement last winter . 
it seems that the federal government has not taken the lead as they said they would . 
this is troubling and I would like some definitive and clear answers so that I can respond in a sensible manner to the people who are in contact with my office on a continual basis . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the honourable senator ' s impatience , if you will , with this question . 
i can only assure her that the minister is very involved and continues to move the agenda forward . 
to repeat what I have just undertaken to do , I will provide whatever additional information I can in an effort to relieve some of the concern expressed by the honourable senator . 
foreign Affairs 
report of Canadian Council for International Co - operation - Recommendation to Establish Task Force - Government Policy 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
today , the Canadian Council for International Co - operation released a report , " The Reality of Aid , " which points out that Canada ' s contributions to official development assistance have reached a 30 - year low and now stand in eleventh position among the 21 OECD donors , down from seventh position in 1996 . 
this is a pretty poor performance for the number one country in the world . 
recognizing that the government has said that Canada intends to increase the aid budget , the question remains as to the quality of aid . 
thus , the council has recommended the creation of a Canadian aid renewal task force to undertake a systematic review of CIDA ' s program priorities . 
will the government leader take this recommendation to the government and undertake to report back to the Senate whether such a task force will , in fact , be created and , if not , why not ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I recognize the report to which the honourable senator refers . 
it was released today , I believe , so I am sure the minister in question has not had an opportunity to review it in any detail as yet . 
the Speech from the Throne clearly outlines a commitment to increased aid and international development assistance . 
it further makes a commitment that such assistance will be brought forward in innovative new ways to be more effective in assisting poor countries to achieve economic development results . 
i hope the sentiment expressed in the Speech from the Throne will be given effect as we move through the budget process . 
to answer the honourable senator ' s question specifically , I will convey his inquiry to the minister in question . 
we should give the minister some time to absorb the substance of the report , but I will undertake to bring back a response to the honourable senator . 
plan to Establish Coherent Foreign Aid Policy 
hon. Lois M. Wilson : 
honourable senators , I was at the round table today sponsored by the CCIC with CIDA officials present . 
where is the forum to resolve these contradictions so that there will be more coherence in our aid policy ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne clearly signalled a renewed look at our foreign aid policy . 
that renewed look will be brought forward as we work our way through the budget cycle and address some of the important issues that have been raised in that regard . 
the decisions regarding foreign aid obviously must respect the goals of reducing poverty , improving health and education and , indeed , the good governance in countries throughout the world . 
it remains an important objective of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade . 
senator Wilson : 
honourable senators , that is very comforting , but the answer we received this afternoon is that there is no plan . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would hate to be that definitive . 
the plans as indicated in the Speech from the Throne will be developed over the weeks and months ahead . 
as we move through the budget cycle , I am hopeful that the honourable senator will see some detail that will give her some comfort . 
composition of Budget for Foreign Aid 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister has indicated that the aid budget will be increased . 
the aid budget has been depleted to a 30 - year low . 
it has also started to include more humanitarian aid and peacekeeping and the kind of intervention that is taking place in Kosovo . 
is there any undertaking by the government to increase the aid budget for traditional programs of education and basic health , rather than for those other initiatives , which should justifiably be put under a different category ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Canada ' s role through our armed services has expanded dramatically . 
there are probably more service members overseas today than there have been since the Korean War . 
our peacekeeping role has been expanded dramatically . 
i have not had an opportunity to read the report , " The Reality of Aid 2000 , " so I do not know how such expenditures are categorized therein . 
my impression was that those expenditures would not have been lumped in , for purposes of budgeting , with the aid expenditures referenced by the Prime Minister and the initiatives described in the Speech from the Throne . 
senator Andreychuk : 
perhaps I could enlighten the minister . 
many of the costs for peacekeeping initiatives , the military interventions , and the peace - building and humanitarian activities were covered with funds from the aid budget . 
that category has increased , whereas other aid capacities have decreased . 
i would appreciate it if the minister would look into the question of supplying more aid directed to the root causes of unrest in developing countries . 
provision of Foreign Aid Conditional on Human Rights Record - Government Policy 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
is that a change in the Liberal government ' s position ? 
the Liberal Party in the past has spoken against tying aid to human rights . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , because I am not familiar with the particular speech to which Senator Andreychuk refers , I will raise the matter with the minister responsible and bring back an answer for the honourable senator as soon as possible . 
business of the Senate 
point of Order 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , had there been time in Question Period , I would have asked a question of the Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
that senator is not in the chamber ; however , I do see in the chamber the deputy chairman and several members of the Banking Committee . 
earlier today , Senator Hervieux - Payette presented a report from the Banking Committee that was read and taken to the Table . 
i went to the Table to examine the report , and it had not been certified as a report from the committee by the Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
i was advised by the Table Officers that they had noticed that as well and had sent it back to Senator Hervieux - Payette for her signature . 
can the Deputy Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce describe for us the nature of the meeting in which it was decided - if , indeed , it was decided - that the Banking Committee should study , clause by clause , Bill S - 3 ? 
is there a record of that meeting ? 
was a motion put , and is there a record of that motion , instructing the chair or the deputy chair to present that report in the Senate ? 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , the answer is yes . 
senator Kinsella : 
can the deputy chair explain whether another senator was designated to present the report to the house , rather than having it presented in this house by the chair or the deputy chair , which is the custom and usage of this place ? 
senator Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I am not Senator Kolber . 
i do not know what was in his head . 
a message was received in my office yesterday asking me to report the bill , but I was in transit from Saskatoon to Ottawa , and , as you may know , that takes all day . 
therefore , I gave no response to that request . 
the first I heard about it being presented today was when Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette rose in this chamber . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , in a publication of the Senate dated November 1999 entitled Fundamentals of Senate Committees , on page 14 there is a description of how reports are to proceed from a committee to the chamber . 
it indicates that , when a committee chair submits a report , the committee is stating that it has concluded the work assigned to it by the Senate through the order of reference . 
in the instance of a bill , that includes , in committee , clause - by - clause analysis of that bill . 
the usage and the practice is that , in committee , the chair asks the question : " When shall this bill be reported ? " 
a member of the committee then moves a motion in that respect . 
authorization is thereby given , if that motion is carried , to the chair to present it . 
this publication also says that the report is either put forward by the chair or another designated member of the committee . 
i should like to determine , in the absence of the chair and the deputy chair , the process that was followed by which another member of the committee was so designated . 
the process needs some quality and control in order for us to know whether a committee report is indeed the report of the committee decided by the majority members of the committee . 
that is one of my problems with respect to the report that was presented in this place earlier in the proceedings . 
my second problem is that I am not certain - because I do not have the blues here yet - as to what His Honour said upon presentation of that report . 
i believe I heard something about leave being granted for something , but I do not know whether that was in reference to the proceeding that was occurring here today or whether it was in reference to the decision that had been taken some time ago when the bill was referred to the Banking Committee . 
there was some confusion at that time as to whether it was sent to one committee or two committees . 
we need clarification on those two matters . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak to this point of order . 
i have listened to Senator Kinsella . 
i am not sure whether he is concerned about three matters or one matter . 
he first raised the matter of the necessary signature on the bill and I gather has found that when he examined the bill there was no signature . 
i gather that is something that has been remedied since that was discovered . 
the second matter is whether it was dealt with properly by the committee . 
i gather from Senator Tkachuk ' s question that , in his opinion , there was a motion to report the bill . 
the third matter is whether there was a proper designation of a member of the committee in terms of whether it should be presented by the chair , who is not here and could not report it , the deputy chair , or another member of the committee , in fact , the sponsor of the bill , Senator Hervieux - Payette . 
i am not sure if that would go to the propriety of whether the matter is properly before the Senate , but I would submit that it does not ; that a member of the committee might present in the absence of the chair when the deputy chair is present , although the normal expectation would be that the deputy chair would act in the absence of the chair . 
as to the wording of the Speaker ' s statement following the tabling of the report , I will repeat it . 
i was given a copy . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
you were the only one , then . 
senator Hays : 
it was : 
pursuant to a special order of the Senate moved with leave and adopted on November 24 , and notwithstanding rule 97 ( 4 ) , this bill now stands referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
i received that while coming into the chamber . 
my understanding is that that was to ensure that this legislation was dealt with in an orderly way according to the desire of the Senate . 
i was trying to accommodate the bill being looked at not only by the Banking Committee but also by the Foreign Affairs Committee because of matters that senators raised in connection with the specifics of the bill . 
i will not get into that , however . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , at question is the principle of allowing a member of the committee , without authorization of the committee , if such is the case , to table a report , even if it is approved by the committee . 
the committee decided to report the bill . 
no one , as far as I know , has seen a draft of the report - perhaps not even the chairman or the deputy chairman . 
out of propriety and respect for their position , they should have at least seen or authorized the release of the report here . 
i gather that that was not done and that Senator Hervieux - Payette was not authorized formally by the committee to present the report . 
i request confirmation of that . 
senator Tkachuk : 
no , that was not done . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
second , not to bog down in procedure , and , I hope , not setting a precedent in sending a bill to more than one committee , I do not see how the Speaker is authorized to send , during Routine Proceedings , a report that has not even been debated in this place from one committee to the next . 
i do not see the link that the Speaker can make . 
this is more a point of information , but I had assumed , during the two days of debate on this issue , that the report would be presented here and that the Senate on its own would decide what to do with it . 
it is a report to the Senate ; it is not a Speaker ' s report . 
i do not know what this term " special order " means . 
when you reread the debate , it simply says , as Senator Hays explained on the second day when he clarified some remarks that were not properly transcribed into the official Hansard , first in one place and then in the next place . 
the assumption was that , to get from one place to the other , it would need reconfirmation in this place . 
the Speaker acted on our behalf , without explanation and without warning . 
i always thought it was the Senate that , in the long run , decided how to deal with bills and reports and where they should go . 
in this case , though , although we do want it to go to the Foreign Affairs Committee , it was done in a way in which the Senate had no say . 
the Senate never had an opportunity to look at the report , to see what was in it . 
senator Hays : 
i wish to might make a further comment on the matter of order , specifically in the context of Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s expressed concern about whether the bill would come back here to be referred to the Foreign Affairs Committee or whether it would go to the Foreign Affairs Committee after the Banking Committee had dealt with it . 
i do not have the precise language in front of me , but I believe it was the interpretation that the Speaker has put on it , that is , that it would go to the Banking Committee first and , following disposition of it or dealing with it by the Banking Committee , that it would go to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
we were silent on anything more than that it is a reasonable interpretation that it would go directly to the Foreign Affairs Committee after the Banking Committee ' s deliberations were completed . 
it is also possible to interpret it the way Senator Lynch - Staunton interpreted it . 
in any event , I gather that the Foreign Affairs Committee has not commenced its deliberations . 
would the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton care to add a few words in terms of his desire to have the matter heard here in the Senate as opposed to the Foreign Affairs Committee ? 
senator Tkachuk : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I presume we are on a point of order , and anyone can speak to a point of order . 
senator Tkachuk : 
i have not had a chance to ask Senator Kroft , who is a member of the steering committee with me on the Banking Committee , whether he was aware that Senator Hervieux - Payette would present the report in the chamber today . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , but a question to Senator Kroft is not in order at this time . 
however , if he wishes to answer and the Senate is prepared to hear him , that is up to him . 
senator Tkachuk : 
perhaps I could explain why I wish to speak at this time . 
senator Kinsella raised an interesting point . 
i have only been here six years , but I was chairman of the Finance Committee for some time and Senator Kirby was chairman of the Banking Committee . 
if I could not present a report , as chairman , I would ask Senator De Ban é to present it . 
if we both could not be here , then we would make another arrangement together . 
the same was true of Senator Kirby . 
he would either present the report or ask me to bring it to the Senate chamber . 
if it was impossible for both he and I to do so , we would agree who should do it - that is , if it was necessary to be done . 
senator Kirby and I had no steering committee . 
together , we were the steering committee , and that arrangement worked quite well . 
i wonder if Senator Kroft was made aware of this . 
that would help us to understand how this took place without me knowing anything about it or signing off on it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I was out of the Chair , but I understand that there are two points of order before us at this time . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
they are wrapped into one . 
first , Your Honour decided during Routine Proceedings - when no point of order or debate is allowed unless leave is granted - to send to another committee a report that had just been presented . 
the rules provide at least one day for the report to be presented and then we proceed to third reading . 
in this case , obviously , we could not move to third reading , but we had no occasion even to see the report . 
i had hoped that , if Your Honour were to have taken a decision , you would have done so during Orders of the Day when we could , perhaps , have had an explanation for this unusual decision . 
this situation is not of our making , by the way . 
second , given that Senator Hervieux - Payette was not authorized formally by the committee to present the report , was the report properly presented ? 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , there are several elements to the point of order . 
with respect to the Banking Committee ' s analysis of the bill , its clause - by - clause study and its report back to the Senate , I went to the Table to view the report . 
a report was there but it was not signed by the honourable senator who had presented it , which raised a procedural question in my mind . 
the report was not presented by the chair nor the deputy chair . 
unless there is a record in the minutes of the committee - and I do not have that in front of me - delegating another senator to present the report , I am not sure the report is properly before the Senate . 
the other issue , which by common agreement is unusual , is that by an order of the house , this report was to be referred to two committees rather than one . 
the desire to have it examined by the Banking Committee related to a series of concerns raised at second reading debate , which were matters of taxation to be properly addressed by the Banking Committee . 
we should have consideration of the report from the Banking Committee before we send the bill off to the Foreign Affairs Committee because there can be linkage between the taxation concerns that the Banking Committee addressed and the foreign affairs issues - in particular , human rights issues which joined the debate at second reading . 
all these issues should be canvassed . 
honourable senators , we may be jumping the gun a bit . 
we only had a report presented . 
we have not taken that report into consideration . 
there is , in my view , a substantial relationship between the analysis of the report and the analysis of the bill , which would then be committed to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
they are the issues that motivated my questioning the order of the matter . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I have commented on the orderliness of what was done by the Banking Committee and Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s matter as well . 
however , I find Senator Kinsella ' s point most interesting . 
on the day in question - and I am not able to put my hands on the Debates of the Senate of that day - there was a desire for members of two committees to direct their collective minds to this bill , particularly because of its nature and one of the elements in it , namely , an issue of human rights . 
we attempted to have the bill go to two committees sequentially . 
the Banking Committee was to deal with the bill first . 
the language we used at the time anticipated that study . 
what does the Senate do or how does the Senate best deal with the product of this committee work ? 
my interpretation of the statements on this matter and all the things we have done to date , subject to not signing the report and whether it is proper for a member of the committee other than the chair or deputy chair to present a report without a specific motion - and I submit that is not an impediment - is that the thrust of what we are attempting to do is served by having the bill go to the two committees and by having the reports of the two committees return here to be dealt with at the same time . 
if that is done , all of Senator Kinsella ' s concerns can be addressed . 
in retrospect , perhaps the honourable senator ' s suggestion was the correct way to go - that is , we should not have referred the bill sequentially to one committee after the other . 
however , having done that , for this process to work , what is happening is exactly what needs to occur to achieve the desired result - namely , to have the work of the two committees before us so it can be considered . 
to do that we need both committee reports before us at the same time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak to the point of order ? 
if not , I will take the matter under advisement . 
i was not here last week when this matter first arose and did not hear all the points . 
however , I would remind honourable senators that when a bill is referred to a committee , the committee must report . 
there is no motion and no amendment at that point . 
there is no discussion . 
that is the situation we are in now . 
however , I will study the matter and report back as quickly as I can . 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , we are now on government business , and I should like , on behalf of the government side , to call as the first item for deliberation the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology dealing with Bill C - 6 . 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the fourth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology ( Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act ) presented earlier today . 
honourable senators , as the sponsor of Bill C - 6 and as Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , which originally spent considerable time studying the subject matter of Bill C - 6 and then , more recently , studied the bill itself following completion of second reading in this chamber , I rise to speak to the report of the committee on Bill C - 6 . 
my comments today will focus on the bill in general , but also and more particularly on the amendments to the bill proposed in the report of the committee presented in this chamber earlier this afternoon . 
in the global economy , information has become an important and valuable commodity . 
where at one time governments were seen as the major collectors and holders of personal information , now the private sector has an increasingly important role in this field . 
the development of networks such as the Internet has made the disclosure and distribution of personal information a matter of concern to Canadians , many of whom feel that their privacy is being reduced as these networks expand . 
in Canada , the federal and most provincial governments have laws that deal with the private sector ' s collection , use and disclosure of personal information , but only Quebec has enacted privacy legislation governing the private sector . 
some organizations have adopted voluntary codes with respect to the collection and use of personal information , but the use of such codes is not widespread and is not uniform on a coast - to - coast basis . 
in 1996 , the federal government committed to developing legislation to protect personal information in the private sector . 
the government ' s goal in 1996 was to legislate by the start of the year 2000 . 
bill C - 6 stems from that commitment . 
legislation that seeks to protect the privacy of personal information must , of necessity , attempt to balance an individual ' s right to know about or consent to the collection of the information , or its use or disclosure , for certain purposes . 
bill C - 6 attempts to strike an appropriate balance between the conflicting goals , the need for consent and the need for an individual to understand that the information is being collected and how it will be used , and the need to have an efficient and functioning economy . 
i wish to assure honourable senators that aside from the one amendment proposed in the committee ' s report , the committee ' s examination of Bill C - 6 revealed that it is indeed a very significant legislative accomplishment . 
the government has authored what can truly be called a masterpiece of electronic commerce . 
it strikes the very significant and delicately drawn balance between business and consumer interests . 
frankly , honourable senators , I have never seen a bill where both business and consumer groups were equally anxious to see a piece of legislation passed . 
every single business , consumer , technology , insurance , bank and even credit - reporting witness who testified before the committee urged the speedy passage of the bill . 
all of these stakeholders agree that it represents a reasonable and fair set of information practices . 
indeed , witnesses from across the entire spectrum of the Canadian economy , with the exception of the health care sector , used phrases in describing this bill and urging its speedy passage such as , " delicate balance , " " result of years and months of negotiation , " " a very good consensus , " and so on . 
the range of witnesses taking that view not only covered the business sectors , it covered , for example , civil rights advocates and privacy experts . 
therefore , honourable senators , if in fact this bill is as good as I have just described it , why has the committee made an amendment ? 
it is to that question that I believe I should devote most of my remarks . 
that is because despite the massive support from business and consumer interests , one very important sector is unanimously opposed to the passage of this bill at this time . 
in short , one sector , the health care sector , is equally unanimous in its opposition to the bill ' s passage . 
it is clear that the health care community as a whole was not part of the admirable consensus that I described a minute ago . 
indeed , even within the health care community itself , there is absolutely no consensus as to what the right solution should be , in the sense that the health care community did not come before us as a cohesive group arguing for a specific set of amendments . 
they came before us arguing for a variety of amendments . 
let me just give you some illustrative examples . 
some witnesses recommended that health care information should be entirely excluded from the bill . 
others , such as the Canadian Medical Association and the Canadian Dental Association , felt that the bill did not provide sufficient protection to health care information about an individual . 
others were concerned about the consent provisions and whether they were adequate in the sense that they did not specifically refer to informed and meaningful consent . 
all members of the health care sector who testified before the committee were uncertain as to the scope and application of this bill . 
they came from doctors , dentists , pharmacists , nurses , hospitals , medical labs , medical research advocates , provincial departments of health , health care accreditation officials , and on and on . 
frankly , honourable senators , not a single health care group that came before the committee or sent correspondence to the committee in the form of a written submission supported the passage of this bill in its current form . 
the committee was also disturbed by the testimony of many health sector witnesses who allege that they did not play a meaningful role in consultations leading up to the tabling of the bill . 
indeed , some witnesses told this committee about going to government officials as recently as eight or nine months ago and being told by those officials that they should not worry about this bill because it was an e - commerce bill and not one directed at the health care sector . 
therefore , honourable senators , the consensus that was so admirable in the rest of the economy and that was developed by the minister in a very short period of time , some 18 months , did not apply to the health care sector because the bill was designed to be an e - commerce bill . 
as a result , the health care system was not instantly included as one of the sectors that ought to play an integral part in the negotiations . 
while many elements in the health care sector are paid for out of public funds , the people and organizations that perform the actual services may be part of the private sector , the public sector , or the not - for - profit sector . 
there is a much greater degree of intertwining between the public and private sectors in health care than in any other area of the Canadian economy . 
thus , honourable senators , the health care sector is very reluctant to proceed with the bill as it is . 
indeed , the Minister of Industry implicitly supported this rationale when , in testimony before the Social Affairs Committee last Thursday with respect to the application of Bill C - 6 to health information , he said that , in the first three years after the bill came into effect , its impact on the health care sector would be very limited . 
indeed , he argued that the impact would be sufficiently limited , such that it did not justify delaying the effects of this legislation for the sake of clarifying its impact on the health care sector . 
honourable senators , the committee members understood the minister ' s arguments , understood the facts on which it was based , yet came to a completely different conclusion based on exactly the same facts . 
the committee remained concerned that this e - commerce legislation could have unclear or unintended side - effects ; more important , the committee was more concerned as to what those side effects are likely to be . 
indeed , what the impact is likely to be on the health care sector is not clear at all . 
if this bill will only affect , as the minister argued , a very small portion of the health care sector in the first three years after it is proclaimed , then clearly there is a window of opportunity to clarify the effects of this bill on the particularly sensitive and intimate personal health information without jeopardizing the impact of the bill on the remaining and vast commercial sector . 
since , with this amendment , the bill will impact on the health care area in the public sector only three years after the bill comes into effect , we are providing an opportunity for the government and the affected parties to develop rules and regulations that will assure Canadians that their health information will be dealt with appropriately by all health care stakeholders . 
honourable senators , faced with both that window of opportunity and the unanimity of the support of all the other sectors of the Canadian economy for the bill proceeding quickly , the committee then considered whether there was a way to meet the objectives of those who want the bill passed quickly while simultaneously addressing the concerns of the health care sector . 
the committee unanimously rejected the notion of a complete exemption from privacy legislation of the health care sector , a proposal put forward by some witnesses . 
the committee did , however , believe that a short period of time was desirable to try to see if an effective consensus could be built as to how this bill should be changed in order to make it impact fairly and equitably on the health care sector . 
last Thursday , we heard from a series of health care witnesses . 
they had obviously spent some time getting together before they testified , because every single one of them proposed exactly the same amendment , which was a five - year delay before the bill would come into effect for the health care sector . 
given the critical importance of private health information and the need to have health information covered by a privacy act , the committee ' s view was that five years was far too long . 
we opted instead for a one - year delay after proclamation , or two years from the time the bill receives Royal Assent . 
the minister has already said that the bill will be proclaimed one year after it receives Royal Assent , so our proposal can be looked at as either two years after Royal Assent or one year after proclamation . 
our view is that two years should be sufficient for interested parties in the health care sector and government officials in the departments of industry and health to reach a consensus as to how this bill should be changed in order to have it impact effectively on the health care sector , and in a way that removes much of the uncertainty now surrounding it . 
we also believe , honourable senators , that there is a significant negotiating advantage to the structure of our amendment , in the following sense . 
our amendment proposes that , in the event that the two years go by after Royal Assent , one year after proclamation , and no consensus is reached and no amendments are introduced , the current bill will go into effect on the health care sector . 
therefore , honourable senators , our view was that this was more than a modest incentive for people in the health care sector to try to reach a consensus to avoid all the problems they say they are concerned about . 
having a deadline that would put the bill into effect unless a better consensus is achieved in the meantime would work very effectively . 
i should say , honourable senators , that the committee did a yeoman ' s job in a very short period of time . 
we had many hours of hearings . 
we heard from 25 witnesses , which is roughly half the number people that originally asked to be heard . 
in the latter days of the hearings , additional witnesses kept coming up and asking to be heard . 
it thus became very clear to the committee that if we were going to find the correct solution to the health care sector problem , by keeping the bill before us until we had negotiated what the solution would be , it would take a very long time . 
in the meantime , had we taken that approach , the bill would not be law and would not apply to all the other sectors of the Canadian economy that want the bill applied . 
therefore , our view was that the logical thing to do is not to delay its application to all the remaining sectors of the economy that like the bill and want it passed , but only to delay its application to one sector , and in that case only for one additional year after proclamation . 
that , honourable senators , is essentially the background to the report . 
if you want a more detailed analysis of the evidence the committee heard , which I think strongly supports the committee ' s conclusion , I refer you to the second report of the committee , which was tabled in this chamber yesterday . 
i would urge honourable senators to read that . 
again , our view is that this one - year delay after proclamation , two years after Royal Assent , will lead to very focused negotiations between the departments of health and industry and the health care sector . 
finally , honourable senators , there is one other issue that I should like to comment on , and that deals with the Privacy Act . 
he pointed out that there are some significant differences between Bill C - 6 and the Privacy Act . 
for example , the present Privacy Act allows recourse to the Federal Court only in situations where access to records has been denied . 
complaints about the collection , use or disclosure of information by a government institution cannot be referred to the Federal Court . 
yet , under Bill C - 6 , complaints with respect to the collection , use or disclosure of information by the private sector can be appealed to the Federal Court . 
surely , honourable senators , as people in government , we must require that the same standard of privacy protection be applied to government institutions as is applied to private institutions . 
the conclusion that the committee drew from that was that , if Bill C - 6 becomes law , there is a need for the Privacy Act to be updated so that government institutions are subject to at least the same standard of privacy protection as private institutions . 
related to that issue also , honourable senators , is that because the bill calls for a public education program by the Privacy Commissioner , and because Bill C - 6 imposes significant new responsibilities and substantially enlarges the mandate of the Privacy Commissioner , it is obviously , again , an inherent part of the committee ' s report that additional resources will be required by the Privacy Commissioner if he is to carry out the expanded mandate called for in this legislation . 
in closing , honourable senators , the committee tried to reach a balance that would ensure that the application of this bill to the vast majority of the Canadian economy - that is , the largest number of sectors of it - would proceed as expeditiously as possible and that , for a very short period , namely , one year after proclamation of the bill , it would not apply to the health care sector , in the hope that , in the ensuing 24 months , we can reach a negotiated solution to this bill . 
that , honourable senators , is the background behind the bill . 
the amendment was passed unanimously by the committee . 
there was no dissension with this proposed amendment from senators on either side of the chamber . 
therefore , honourable senators , I would urge your adoption of the committee ' s report . 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
would the honourable senator accept a question ? 
senator Kirby : 
Yes. 
senator Oliver : 
the honourable senator said throughout his remarks that there was only one sector for which there was no consensus , and that was the health care sector . 
he also said that part of the answer is that it was designed as an e - commerce bill and not a health care bill . 
what went wrong and what can this Senate learn from this process ? 
what instructions does the honourable senator have to ensure that this does not happen again ? 
here , you are amending a bill and sending it back to the other chamber . 
what went wrong with this process ? 
senator Kirby : 
i can only speculate on that . 
senator Oliver ' s question is a good one . 
he will appreciate that our focus was on the content of the bill and people ' s reaction to it , given the shortness of time and our desire to deal with the bill quickly . 
what I am about to say now is drawn from bits and pieces of evidence as opposed to a detailed conclusion . 
first , the bill started out correctly as an e - commerce and an e - commerce privacy bill . 
instinctively , when one thinks of e - commerce one does not think of the health care sector in Canada because it is publicly funded . 
that is what we normally think about it . 
if you were to rhyme off all the sectors that are involved with e - commerce , most of us , even if we thought about the health care sector , would dismiss that sector . 
therefore , it is understandable that it was not at the forefront of the initial negotiations . 
the second thing that makes it different is that the bill applies to private - sector commercial activity . 
again , when we think of commercial activities , we are not inclined to think instinctively of the health care sector . 
however , when we are forced to sit down and think about it we realize that there are labs and other things that are business related . 
nevertheless , when the question of commercial activity is first raised , one does not immediately think of the large number of health care companies in the health care field . 
finally , there is a factor in the health care field that does not exist anywhere else ; that is , large numbers of public and private sector institutions are providing identical services . 
labs is the obvious one . 
there are also occupational therapy services and some diagnostic services . 
we do not think of them as being different because they are all paid by the same payor . 
therefore , I think there was an honest and early oversight . 
perhaps not a bad reflection of that is that , when this bill was before the Industry Committee in the House of Commons - and to indicate the level of interest in the bill I wish to inform you that they had 18 days of hearings on it - a very short amount of time was spent on the health care field because witnesses did not ask to appear before the committee . 
there was far more time spent on health care before the Senate committee than there was before the House committee , which is not to criticize the House committee . 
no one in the health care sector had come to the realization that this bill had significant impact for them . 
in part , as one moves into new fields of commerce , such as e - commerce and so on , the traditional barriers between various sectors of the economy are collapsing . 
in the future , when looking at bills affecting these new kinds of communication systems , which is effectively what e - commerce is , we must be careful to ensure that we are completely comprehensive and that we get everyone inside the tent . 
i do not think anyone should be blamed ; there is no scapegoat here . 
honourable senators , what occurred here was a series of inadvertent things . 
this is a terrific bill , but it seems to the committee that it makes sense to deal with the one problem . 
alternatively , if you pass the bill unamended you are imposing the bill on a significant sector of the Canadian society against the wishes of every organization in the society . 
our view is that that is probably not a great way to do public policy . 
senator Oliver : 
that leads to my second question . 
a number of the medical witnesses who did appear said that one possible solution for them would be if their code , as drafted , could somehow be amended or attached . 
could the honourable senator explain why the committee did not accept those representations that came from a number of the medical health care witnesses ? 
senator Kirby : 
Yes. 
that is a good question . 
the best example was the Canadian Medical Association , who suggested that we should add their code to the bill . 
the problem with that option is that you cannot do it quickly . 
why would you pick the Canadian Medical Association ' s code and not the dental association ' s code or the pharmacists ' s code ? 
they all have different privacy codes . 
the minute you ask that question , you get yourself into the detailed set of negotiations and consensus building that I said was required . 
the committee came to the conclusion that , while one could do that , it would clearly take a matter of several months . 
our preference was to get the bill passed with respect to those sectors of the economy that are on side and to use the intervening 24 months to build a consensus . 
it is a fact that several of the professional and institutional organizations indicated that they already had privacy codes that made those of us on the committee optimistic to the fact that it should be possible , within the 24 months , to develop out of these various privacy codes a consensus set of codes that would apply to the health care sector . 
our view was that it was better to do that than to grab one of the codes belonging to one of the groups , adopt it , and apply it to everyone . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I begin where Senators Oliver and Kirby left off . 
first , the people from the health care sector generally represented to us that they had not been involved in the development of the Canadian Standards Association code on which this bill is based . 
second , as Senator Kirby mentioned , some of them think they were led to believe by someone in the government that this bill would not apply to the health care sector . 
indeed , it does not apply , apparently , to large parts of the health care sector , those being the " non - commercial " parts , including the professional relationships between patient and doctor and patient and hospital , and so on . 
nevertheless , when you try to disentangle commercial from non - commercial activity in the health care sector , it becomes very difficult to decide where and how the bill will operate . 
those two factors have been quite important in respect of the health care sector . 
with regard to appending the professional code of the doctors and dentists , or whomever , to the bill , I must confess that I was greatly tempted . 
it was clear on reading them that those codes represent a rather higher standard than the consensus - based code of the Canada Standards Association . 
however , I believe that , even if we had decided to do so , we would be venturing into quite uncertain constitutional waters . 
we would be purporting to legislate and to regulate in respect of the professions , which I think in most cases are the preserve of the provincial legislatures . 
honourable senators , there would be no point in my trying to add anything to what we have heard from the chairman of the committee by way of explanation , background or justification for the amendment that is before us at the present time . 
his speech in that respect was full and accurate , and I only say that I agree with all of it . 
i hope it will commend itself to the Senate and ultimately to the government and to the House of Commons . 
i take this occasion , however , to thank the chairman of the committee for having led us safely and successfully , so far , through a very close study of a very important bill over a period of 20 hours . 
i thank him for having led us to a solution , which , while it may not have been the preferred solution of everyone who appeared before us or , indeed , of everyone on the committee , is nevertheless an honourable and practical compromise , which , as I say , should commend itself to the Senate and to the government . 
this has not been an easy task for him , and all of us on the committee appreciate his forbearance and leadership . 
as I said , I will not add anything to the explanation and the background that he has given us with regard to the health care sector . 
i do , however , wish to flag one other matter in the bill . 
this is not a matter upon which the committee has pronounced , but it is a very serious concern of mine . 
i flag it only to ask you to turn it over in your minds overnight because I intend to return to it when we come to third reading and quite probably to propose an amendment . 
there is a provision in this bill , honourable senators , to the effect that highly personal information collected on individuals by business enterprises in the course of their business may be disclosed 20 years after the individual in respect of whom it has been collected has died . 
i believe this provision is indefensible and , if I can , I intend to move that that provision be struck from the bill when the time comes at third reading . 
i have asked various witnesses before the committee - from the minister to the Commissioner of Privacy to various privacy advocates - to offer a principled justification for this provision , and none of them has been able to do so . 
the only explanation that any of them has offered is that there is a parallel provision in the Privacy Act , a provision that covers information collected by the federal government and its agencies . 
well , there may be some valid public policy reason for such a provision with respect to information collected by the government - I do not know about that and I would like to revisit it some time - but I cannot think of a single principled reason why your credit card information , your mortgage information , your banking information , your pharmaceutical record - information collected by commercial organizations for commercial purposes - should ever be disclosed . 
obviously , the possibility of investigation of a crime and national security and all those things are already covered in the bill . 
we have been told , " Well , they cannot simply be disclosed . 
there must be some reason for it . 
perhaps the Commissioner of Privacy might be involved at some point . " 
all this is very subjective , especially 20 years after the person has died . 
one lawyer before us , Mr. Lawson , to whom I referred yesterday , and who is , like most of the people who appeared before us , a strong supporter of the bill , said , " Well , in my view , the right to privacy extends only to living persons . " 
i absolutely reject that idea , and I think we should reject it . 
i do not want to anticipate the speech that I will probably make tomorrow afternoon , but I do want to give you a foretaste of it . 
i want you to know that I will put the clause before you and invite colleagues to offer me a principled justification , if they can . 
if they cannot , I would invite you to join me in amending the bill at third reading to delete that provision . 
honourable senators , as I indicated at second reading , as a general comment , this is a bill that enjoys and deserves to enjoy just about universal support from Parliament , as well as to the extent that there is any awareness of it out there in the country . 
it will , after all , extend the protection of the privacy law to the voluminous personal information that is collected about each one of us by commercial enterprises in the course of their business . 
with the exception of the provision to which I alluded a few minutes ago , those protections , according to all the evidence , are solid and effective . 
as Senator Kirby has told us , this bill is the result of an extraordinary consensus involving the private business sector , the federal government , and various privacy advocacy and civil liberties groups . 
the government can take very considerable pride in having forged that consensus . 
for all of those who believe , as I think most of us do , that privacy is an integral part of human dignity and autonomy and that it is a human right , this is a major step forward . 
i do believe that , when we pass the bill , we will have added significantly to the legal protections and framework for human rights in this country . 
all Canadians may not be aware of what we are debating and doing today , but I think this bill as amended will go down in history as one of the principal achievements of this or any other recent Parliament . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I thank both Senator Murray and Senator Kirby for their excellent work on this piece of legislation . 
senator Murray is not normally a member of the committee but , as he indicated in his earlier presentation , he has an abiding interest in this particular piece of legislation . 
though it is not usually within the purview of the Rules of the Senate of Canada , we actually had four members on our steering committee . 
senator LeBreton , Senator Kirby , and I were joined in our discussions by Senator Murray , because we understood his deep concern and interest in the legislation . 
like Senator Kirby and Senator Murray , I am generally supportive of Bill C - 6 . 
i am also strongly supportive of the amendment . 
it might be interesting to Senator Murray and to Senator Kirby that I have just had delivered to me a letter from the Canadian Dental Association . 
they are not particularly happy with our amendment . 
they wanted us to go in a different direction . 
they testified to the committee that they wanted us to strengthen and toughen the legislation . 
they state that the Canadian Dental Association has always been in favour of passing Bill C - 6 with amendments that would provide for greater protection of personal information through informed consent versus the weak consent provisions included in the CSA code . 
i agree with them . 
i would also like to see much stronger protection . 
the dilemma faced by the committee regarded consent . 
if we had put aside all other aspects of the bill to deal only with the increased need of privacy protection for the health community , I suggest to you , honourable senators , that we would not be able to pass any aspect of this bill for probably a six - month period . 
the purpose of our amendment was to allow quick passage and enforcement of the sections of the proposed legislation that address e - commerce outside of the health care field . 
meanwhile some sober second thought could be applied , not necessarily by this chamber but in discussions between the health community , the industry community , the health minister and his staff , and the industry minister and his staff . 
perhaps those parties can come up with amendments to make this legislation meet the needs and objectives of the health care industry . 
honourable senators , that issue became the focus of my concern throughout our study of the bill . 
some witnesses spoke only to the e - commerce sections of the bill . 
they came from the computer industry , from informatics , from the banking industry , from the marketing industry , and they were all in favour of this bill , taking only minor exceptions with its contents . 
in fact , they were glowing in support of this bill . 
they talked about the monumental achievement of getting a consensus from all of these groups on the CSA code . 
committee members found out quickly that the medical community did not have a consensus position . 
the doctors and the dentists claimed that their own codes were tougher and better than the CSA model code . 
we then heard from pharmacists and those in the business of collecting health care information who , quite frankly , wanted a total exemption . 
i , for one , was not prepared to give them a total exemption . 
if they want to use or sell my information , then I should have some say over exactly what information will fall into their fat little hands . 
more important , we never dealt with two critical issues - the definitions of " commercial activity " and " informed consent . " 
i was surprised to hear the Privacy Commissioner state that all consent is informed consent . 
with the greatest of respect to Bruce Phillips , I do not think so . 
if I am dragged off to an emergency room where I face five doctors and 16 other staff who say I need certain urgent medical interventions , quite frankly I will sign anything . 
i hope that anyone who may be acting on my behalf will sign anything that will get me the care I need at that moment . 
surely , that is not informed consent . 
i do not know what side effects can be expected from the proffered treatment and , frankly , at that moment , I am not terribly concerned about any side effects . 
the definitions have not been clearly addressed in this bill with respect to personal health information . 
i am therefore fully supportive of the committee ' s recommendation that we put in a delay so that some of these dilemmas can be addressed . 
honourable senators , the involved parties needed to have their feet put to the fire . 
the testimony heard by the committee members was divided and confusing . 
time is needed to define clear rules governing personal health information after dialogue between all the players who are involved in the collection and use of personal health information . 
simply allowing two years before the coming into force of the bill does not achieve our objective . 
Canadians deserve clear guidelines concerning the use of their personal health information , including the requirement for informed consent . 
most Canadians would not wish to be so protective that their health care information was not available for research that may help to cure a disease or condition . 
if such information is needed for testing of new drugs , then a balance must be found . 
that balance does not exist in this legislation . 
we can only hope that , by our sober second thought and this amendment , a balance will be found . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have a short question . 
i alerted Senator Carstairs to this question earlier today . 
i have not looked at the bill as carefully as I should have nor have I read the testimony . 
however , in listening to the arguments , I am concerned about separating , as a question of public policy , the identity of the person whose information is being sought and the content of that information . 
as an example , the Princess Margaret Hospital in Toronto serves 60,000 female breast cancer patients every year . 
next door , the Mount Sinai Hospital sees 25,000 women every year at their breast cancer clinic . 
so within 100 yards on that city block , every year , 85,000 Canadian women are going through that process . 
that information is now collected and correlated with research and diagnosticians , all in central locations . 
there has been a majestic leap forward in at least the environment for treating breast cancer . 
having said that , in order to project a cure , the content of the information available is inseparable from an advance in research . 
without that information which is gathered , correlated and sorted , there will be no advance whatsoever in moving against the horrible disease of breast cancer . 
i can apply exactly the same rationale when it comes to HIV , or any disease that takes hold of us . 
i am still not clear whether either the committee or the amendment deals with this fundamental issue . 
in effect , does it dilute the problem and impose barriers to researchers for access to the information that is necessary for the advance of research ? 
instead of applauding ourselves , are we not stultifying research ? 
senator Carstairs : 
honourable senators , it might interest you to know that we heard from two groups of researchers who had two different opinions on this matter . 
one group felt that we had to have more controls to protect the privacy of the individuals giving the information . 
the other group wanted research of this nature totally exempted from provisions of the bill . 
they felt that these controls would result in the worst case scenario , to which the honourable senator has referred , in terms of not being able to develop the very kind of epidemiological information that is required . 
the honourable senator has identified our dilemma . 
we had serious presentations from people who said to us that , indeed , this measure would curtail the very kind of research data collection to which the honourable senator has referred . 
others said it would not do that . 
in that way , we will not be harming research . 
our researchers have done a good job of doing that in the past . 
there are some who say that an individual who does not want to participate in a research project should have the right to deny their information to that research project . 
thus , we need to develop protocols . 
frankly , however , we need the time to do it . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , if there is a dilemma at the root of the legislation , what is the rush to judgment ? 
what is the priority that makes us feel so impelled to proceed on this legislation if there are serious questions in the minds of some of the proponents of the bill ? 
senator Carstairs : 
the problem with the legislation , Senator Grafstein , is that for the most part no one - and certainly no one in the House of Commons - dealt with the impact of health information on this bill . 
senator Grafstein : 
another sloppy job in the other place . 
senator Carstairs : 
they did a sloppy job in the other place . 
to be fair to them , they did not do it deliberately . 
the health care people themselves called the Department of Industry . 
they were told , " It is an e - commerce bill . 
it does not impact on you . " 
as a result , the normal health care industry witnesses who might well have come forward did not come forward early in the game because they did not think the legislation would impact upon them . 
it was only in May or June of this year , after the bill had been through the process in the other place , that the health care community became sufficiently concerned to say , " This bill does impact on us . 
thank goodness we have another chamber , a chamber of sober second thought , to which we can now go to make our case . " 
that is exactly what they did . 
having said that , probably 90 per cent of the bill deals with e - commerce , issues that have nothing to do with the public health care field . 
they are positive pieces of change to guarantee privacy in the area of Internet shopping , and the spreading and sharing of information on the Internet . 
those kinds of things should in my view go into force and effect as soon as possible . 
i would hate to delay the whole process because of this window which we have , I hope , opened and through which some fresh air will be allowed to flow so that we can examine the subject and perhaps force some positive changes with respect to public health information . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
on division . 
motion agreed to and report adopted , on division . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill , as amended , be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Kirby , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Report of Committee Adopted 
on the Order : 
resuming the debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Milne , seconded by the Honourable Senator Chalifoux , on adoption of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs ( Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act and to amend another Act in consequence , with amendments ) presented in the Senate on November 30 , 1999 . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I shall try to be brief . 
i do not intend to again begin exploring the components of this bill . 
i am rising today to support adoption of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affaires concerning Bill C - 7 . 
it is clear , honourable senators , that in the event of sexual assault on children or vulnerable individuals , action must be taken promptly . 
one offence is one too many . 
the consequences are serious , and we must do everything in our power as parliamentarians to prevent the recurrence of such events . 
i would like to demonstrate the need for Canada ' s Parliament to pass Bill C - 7 by referring to a case of sexual assault earlier this year on three children in a daycare centre in Quebec . 
i will not name the city involved , because criminal charges are pending . 
i will try to avoid revealing too many of the details of this criminal matter , but I want , nevertheless , to give them to you within the limits of parliamentary rules . 
in 1985 , a prominent man in a city in Quebec established a daycare centre . 
this was the only daycare centre in the city , located near Montreal . 
on November 22 , he was arrested and charged with sexual assault on three little girls aged four , who had been entrusted to his care . 
released the same day , he was arrested again the following day for having returned to the daycare centre and spoken to the teachers there , thus being in breach of the conditions of his release . 
it is the Youth Protection Branch that alerted the municipal police after receiving a complaint from parents who were sending their children to the daycare centre . 
the whole thing started when it was recently discovered that , in 1992 , the same individual had been found guilty of similar acts and given a suspended sentence . 
at the time , no one in the town where that person set up the daycare centre , not even the police , had been informed of his criminal background . 
the local chief of police only found out about it on October 26 , a few days before the charges were laid . 
honourable senators , these events have created quite a stir in society and the media in Quebec over the last two or three weeks . 
the Quebec Minister of the Family , Mrs. L é ger , had to respond to accusations of laxness levelled against her department regarding verification of the criminal background of owners of daycare centres when issuing permits for this type of operation . 
to ensure that parents who send their children to Quebec daycare centres do not lose confidence in the process to deliver permits to operate a daycare centre , the Minister of Public Security , Mr. M é nard , announced on November 25 an action plan to deal with the situation . 
the plan provides for greater cooperation between the Department of the Family and the S û ret é du Qu é bec to ensure that the judicial records of all daycare centre permit holders are checked to avoid a repeat of cases such as the one I related earlier . 
that same day , the Minister of the Family also announced additional measures to meet the concerns raised by a Liberal MNA , Mr. Copeman . 
on November 25 , during Question Period in the National Assembly , Mr. Copeman had asked the government whether the measures to be taken to check judicial records applied to the 12,000 Quebec workers in the daycare system . 
according to Minister L é ger , a new control mechanism should be in place by the beginning of next year , in other words , in a few days , for doing a background check on Quebec ' s 12,000 daycare workers . 
part of this responsibility will fall to the holders of daycare licences and to members of the boards of directors of centres for the care of very young children , all of whom will be monitored by the Department of Public Security . 
this extensive operation will be launched in the next few days and will be pursued intensively in the coming months . 
i am sure , honourable senators , that those of you who have followed the work of this chamber on Bill C - 7 will know where I am headed . 
the National Assembly , in its enthusiasm , or by a very unfortunate combination of circumstances , forgot that this came under the authority of this Parliament . 
although we are concerned about what happened in Quebec , we can only be satisfied that this Parliament was clear - sighted enough to give thought to the rules that Bill C - 7 will make it possible to introduce . 
it was not my intention to speak at length , but I wished to relate the grim story now unfolding in Quebec . 
as Senator Andreychuk reminded us yesterday , Bill C - 7 is certainly not a panacea . 
it is not a miracle solution . 
we must not think that , because we are introducing these rules , we will all now be protected when we put our children in daycare . 
on the contrary , we are authorizing the introduction of an additional mechanism for the protection of children and other vulnerable groups . 
i hope that this measure will have your support at third reading and that it will help make Canada a society where it is still possible to live in safety . 
honourable senators , I would like to say a few words about Bill C - 7 , to amend the Criminal Records Act . 
the chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , the Honourable Lorna Milne , spoke about our committee ' s report yesterday . 
i support this report . 
essentially , Bill C - 7 addresses the process of rehabilitation and is aimed at facilitating the social reintegration of criminals who have demonstrated during incarceration their desire to become law - abiding citizens . 
initially , this bill contained certain flaws , which have been corrected thanks to the amendments called for by the committee . 
it now gives a definition of " child " and of " vulnerable persons " . 
such important definitions cannot be relegated to the regulations . 
regulatory powers are now given in the bill ; the system of flagging records is limited only to those individuals who have been found guilty of sexual offences . 
a list of the offences involved is appended to the bill . 
in closing these few remarks , I must state that , when the committee studies any matters relating to criminal records , as is the case with this bill , or some related subject such as DNA , we always step up our efforts in order to be assured of compliance with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
as we all know , sections 7 and 8 of our Constitutional Charter protect privacy . 
this is a fundamental value of our system . 
i believe that it can be stated that Bill C - 7 , which we have before us , respects the Constitution , including the 1982 Constitutional Charter , to the best of our knowledge . 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak very briefly on the issue raised yesterday by Senator Andreychuk because it is an important issue . 
she is concerned , and rightly so , about the possibility that the integrity of the pardon system will be eroded if we start nibbling away at it . 
i think the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs were in profound agreement , first , that we wish to preserve the integrity of that system and , second , that this particular bill does not erode that integrity , that the exception it provides to the fundamental weight of the pardon system is so small and so justifiable that we should not be ultimately concerned about it . 
it is a small exception in terms of statistics , honourable senators , and I thought you might be interested to know those statistics . 
in the past 28 years , nearly one quarter of a million pardons have been granted for all offences in Canada . 
only 4,500 of those pardons concern sex offenders . 
we are talking about a very small proportion indeed of the total number of people who have received pardons . 
the bill , with the amendments brought forward , is very clear that it applies only to sexual offences . 
parliament would have to authorize any other intrusion into the integrity of the pardon system , and I think Parliament would think long and hard before doing so . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , I will proceed with the motion for adoption of the report . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
honourable senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall the bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Fraser , bill , as amended , placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Second Reading 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor moved the second reading of Bill S - 14 , to amend the Act of incorporation of the Board of Elders of the Canadian District of the Moravian Church in America . - ( 
honourable Senator Taylor ) 
this bill has been given second reading three times in the last six years . 
this time , nothing has changed . 
the Moravian Church came here at the turn of the century , just after the Senate was formed . 
the Senate has been working on this bill since 1986 , when the church first approached us just to change their name , so that it is the same in French and English , and to change their corporation . 
they do not like having to come here to ask our permission , but that was one the founding articles of the church back at the turn of the century . 
therefore , I would ask honourable senators to move this bill forward . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
senator Taylor : 
honourable senators , with leave , at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Taylor , bills are normally sent to committee . 
that is the normal practice . 
senator Taylor : 
i know that , honourable senators , but this is not a normal bill . 
it is the third time that it has been before us . 
however , that being the case , I move that the bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it is moved by the Honourable Senator Taylor , seconded by the Honourable Senator Poy , that the bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , unless someone is critical of this bill , in view of the fact that it has already been to the committee , as the Honourable Senator Taylor has just said , surely it is within the powers of this chamber to decide to skip that part of the process and move on to third reading . 
i am wondering if there is not a will to do just that , unless it has some element of controversy that merits its re - examination at committee stage . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am in the hands of the Senate , of course . 
i only reminded the Senate that the normal practice is to send all bills to committee . 
senator Corbin : 
then I will move a motion to that effect . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , I have a motion before me now . 
senator Corbin : 
then , honourable senators , I will move an amendment to the motion . 
i move that the bill not be referred , as is the usual practice , to the said committee , but that the Senate agree to proceed with third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion in amendment ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion in amendment agreed to . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion as amended ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion , as amended , agreed to and bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
committee Authorized to Engage Services and Travel 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Spivak , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cochrane : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical , and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject - matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it ; and 
that the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . - ( 
honourable Senator Hays ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have had an opportunity to discuss this motion with the mover , Senator Spivak . 
i wish to suggest that we deal with this matter now . 
with leave , we could modify it or deal with it by way of amendment . 
i suggest the Senator Spivak change the motion by deleting the words " and outside " from the last sentence so that it would read " That the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within Canada for the purpose of such studies " and not as it now reads , namely , " That the Committee have power to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . " 
i invite Senator Spivak to comment on that modification . 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I do not believe I can accept conditions but perhaps I can satisfy Senator Spivak by indicating that I know of no other committee that has such power . 
it would be my intention , as Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate , to take the same position with respect to other committees that I am taking with respect to the Energy , Natural Resources and the Environment Committee . 
of course , Senator Spivak , any committee can come to this place for leave or permission or instructions to travel outside of Canada . 
i hope that satisfies the honourable senator on that count . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
honourable senators , the amendment proposed by Senator Hays asks that the committee be authorized to adjourn from place to place within Canada . 
last year , the Fisheries and Oceans Committee wanted to do this and it was more or less recommended that it not do so via a subcommittee , because that would require the committee to authorize expenses . 
in this case , is the committee receiving the necessary authorization and funds automatically to travel throughout Canada without needing to refer a request to the Internal Economy Committee ? 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I will treat that as a question to me in debate on this matter . 
the answer to Senator Robichaud ' s question about whether or not resources are automatically allocated to a committee for purposes of travelling within Canada is , " No ; they are not . " 
as a former chair of the Energy Committee , and the person responsible for getting the rather broad mandate that I am now questioning as Deputy Leader of the Government , that broad mandate was requested because the committee has a practice of participating in conferences and events that take place in other parts of Canada . 
for instance , Senator Spivak has indicated to me that the committee would like to send a representative or representatives to the Globe 2000 Conference . 
the committee has always sent a representative to that conference and it reports back to the committee . 
i think it is very useful to the work of the committee . 
however , to obtain the resources to send a representative or a member of the committee , it is necessary for it to go to the Internal Economy Committee and have a budget approved . 
in the normal course , that committee does just that . 
that is the only answer I can give Senator Robichaud . 
i would invite Senator Spivak to indicate whether she is prepared to modify her motion or whether it would be necessary to amend it . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , I am prepared to modify it . 
in response to Senator Robichaud , all items are specifically listed and will be thoroughly gone over in view of what we have before us for this coming year . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Spivak , do I understand , then , that you are requesting that we remove from your motion the words " and outside " ? 
senator Spivak : 
no , just the words " and outside Canada . " 
those are the words that should be taken out . 
senator Hays : 
no , just the words " and outside . " 
senator Spivak : 
yes , you are right , " and outside . " 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is there consent that these words be removed from the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , we are back to the main motion , as amended . 
shall we proceed with the question ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
an Hon. Senator : 
dispense ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion , as modified ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion as modified agreed to . 
review of Anti - drug Policy 
motion to Form Special Senate Committee - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin , pursuant to notice of November 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to reassess Canada ' s anti - drug legislation and policies , to carry out a broad consultation of the Canadian public to determine the specific needs of various regions of the country , where social problems associated with the trafficking and use of illegal drugs are more in evidence , to develop proposals to disseminate information about Canada ' s anti - drug policy and , finally , to make recommendations for an anti - drug strategy developed by and for Canadians under which all levels of government to work closely together to reduce the harm associated with the use of illegal drugs . 
that , without being limited in its mandate by the following , the Committee be authorized to : 
- review the federal government ' s policy on illegal drugs in Canada , its effectiveness , and the extent to which it is fairly enforced ; 
- develop a national harm reduction policy in order to lessen the negative impact of illegal drugs in Canada , and make recommendations regarding the enforcement of this policy , specifically the possibility of focusing on use and abuse of drugs as a social and health problem ; 
- study harm reduction models adopted by other countries and determine if there is a need to implement them wholly or partially in Canada ; 
- examine Canada ' s international role and obligations under United Nations conventions on narcotics and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other related treaties in order to determine whether these treaties authorize it to take action other than laying criminal charges and imposing sentences at the international level ; 
- explore the effects of cannabis on health and examine whether alternative policy on cannabis would lead to increased harm in the short and long term ; 
- examine the possibility of the government using its regulatory power under the Contraventions Act as an additional means of implementing a harm reduction policy , as is done in other jurisdictions ; 
- examine any other issue respecting Canada ' s anti - drug policy that the Committee considers appropriate to the completion of its mandate . 
that the Special Committee be composed of five Senators and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have the power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses , to report from time to time and to print such papers , briefs and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the briefs received and testimony heard during consideration of Bill C - 8 , An Act respecting the control of certain drugs , their precursors and other substances , by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during the Second Session of the Thirty - fifth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee have the power to authorize television , radio and electronic broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee be granted leave to sit when the Senate has been adjourned pursuant to subsection 95 ( 2 ) of the Senate Rules ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report not later than three years from the date of its being constituted . 
today , I can tell you that I am more determined than ever to proceed with this plan . 
i did so amply in my remarks on June 14 . 
honourable senators , for the past thirty years , the inaction of successive governments in this area and the intensification of the fight against drugs in the West since the early 1980 s have cost Canadian society dearly . 
the costs associated with the control and elimination of illegal drugs bear no relation to the level of consumption or its effects on society or individuals . 
you will no doubt agree , honourable senators , that this situation warrants the most careful scrutiny . 
this is why , on November 2 , I tabled once again before this house a motion calling for a special Senate committee to review Canada ' s anti - drug laws and policies . 
the object of this exercise will be , first , to give Canadians accurate and detailed information on illegal drugs ; second , to evaluate the standards of morality in Canadian society with respect to the use of illegal drugs and , finally , to give the Government of Canada the information it needs to develop and enact appropriate legislation and policies reflecting the values and desire of the people of Canada with regard to drugs that are currently identified as illegal . 
honourable senators , you have no doubt noted a change in Canadians ' attitude to drug control policies and their results . 
Canadians are beginning to realize that the significant sums of money being invested in the reduction of the consumption and trafficking of drugs are not producing the desired results . 
we also need to know about the experiences of other countries in that area . 
we must evaluate the alternatives used by other countries , since these are sometimes less costly while ensuring better social rehabilitation for an important segment of society . 
last summer , I had the opportunity to travel across the country and to meet Canadians who were pleasantly surprised by my intention to ask you to form a special Senate committee to review Canada ' s anti - drug policy . 
these people came from all walks of life . 
i met police officers , stakeholders who work with drug users , doctors , fathers and mothers , lawyers , senators , university professors , students and journalists . 
i also participated in a number of open line programs during the summer . 
many agreed that the government ' s anti - drug policy is not working and that this repressive program was extremely costly while causing much more harm than good . 
many individuals and institutions offered their expertise and resources , and said they wish to participate in the work of the future committee . 
for the last 15 years , Mr. Puder had fought against the havoc the fight against drugs had wrought on the population of the poor areas of this city . 
he spent the rest of his life organizing prevention and awareness campaigns to show young people in the community the harmful effects of substance abuse . 
he also took part in a number of campaigns to ask the federal government to adopt an anti - drug policy that would see the problem as a public health issue rather than a criminal one . 
i take this opportunity to offer my deepest sympathies to his family . 
i also want to salute Mr. Puder ' s courage and determination over the years as well as his work as a whole . 
i must mention that Senator Chalifoux ' message of condolences did not go unnoticed and was indeed very much appreciated . 
last month , I took part in two similar exercises at the University of Ottawa and the University of Moncton . 
despite very busy schedules , many students put themselves out to take part in the discussions . 
in reaction to the announcement of my project , there was a positive reaction from a number of editorial writers and media commentators all over Canada . 
they expressed surprise that such an initiative could come from the Senate . 
i would say that they perceived my motion as a breath of fresh air over the Canadian political landscape . 
in this connection , The Globe and Mail of June 21 voiced the opinion that the Senate should absolutely give its agreement to this project in order to demonstrate for once and for all that our present drug policies no longer work , and I quote : 
some public policy issues are so touchy that politicians do almost anything to avoid discussing them . 
the law ' s view on the non - medical use of drugs is one such issue .... 
a thoughtful Senate report could document the high direct cost of the current policy and compare it with the realistic alternatives . 
if that report were to meet with broad public support , it could convince timid politicians that reforms are acceptable . 
it was politics , not reason , that led MPs to veto a joint Commons - Senate study of the question three years ago . 
senators would perform a public service if they did the job on their own . 
honourable senators , this past November 26 at a meeting of mayors of the 21 largest cities in Canada , the members of the Canadian Federation of Municipalities , I presented my project . 
this association has more than 600 member municipalities and two years ago it adopted a resolution in support of the federal government ' s prohibitionist approach to illegal drugs . 
this resolution called upon the federal authorities not to modify the provisions of the present Controlled Drugs and Substances Act . 
on April 21 , however , the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police recommended to the federal government the decriminalization , not the legalization , of possession of small quantities of narcotics , including heroin . 
what was most encouraging about the position of the association was that it recommended to Canadians and the federal government the adoption of an approach that would handle all issues relating to drug abuse as public health problems . 
i would remind honourable senators that this position has the support of the RCMP . 
since this stand , the Federation of Canadian Municipalities has been revising its position on this issue . 
it is attempting to come up with a new strategy focusing on harm reduction for drug users . 
the federation , on behalf of its members , sent a letter to the Minister of Justice calling on the government to establish a forum where this issue could be debated . 
that is what I am proposing today , with the creation of a special committee on illegal drugs . 
the municipalities have an important role to play in the reform of our anti - drug policies . 
they are the level of government closest to the citizen . 
they play a special role in identifying the main problems and social repercussions resulting from our repressive anti - drug policies . 
the mayors are aware of this responsibility and they have asked what they could do to change things . 
like all of us , they are looking for alternative solutions to these social problems . 
and , like us , they have reached the conclusion that the repressive policies used to control illegal drugs are ineffective and very costly to the public . 
furthermore , members of the caucus of mayors of major Canadian cities congratulated senators on having been receptive to my proposal of last June . 
in addition , the caucus unanimously approved the motion before you in its entirety . 
to that effect , the Mayor of Edmonton , Bill Smith , wrote me as follows on November 29 , 1999 : 
i certainly support the motion you brought forward to the Senate . 
in my mind , this certainly supports the need for a Senate and the good work that body does . 
as I mentioned at the meeting , I am always upset when I hear people in this country criticizing the Senate . 
i personally know many Senators and how hard they work for Canada . 
i should like to point out that a number of mayors I met with wanted to contribute to the work of this committee . 
let us return now to the work of the committee . 
based on the mandate described in the motion , the study I propose today would be divided into 12 themes . 
honourable senators wishing to take part in the work would be welcome , but for purposes of efficiency , I am trying to limit the number of senators assigned to the work of the committee to five . 
each of the five senators who would be members of the committee will have to agree to take on research work on two or three of the 12 themes . 
i would warn you that the job of directing research and selecting witnesses would not be reserved for the director of research and the committee coordinator . 
it would be hard work . 
each of the senators taking on these subjects would have to report to the other members of the committee on the progress of their research . 
some of you might say that this approach is too rigorous . 
i would reply that I believe we will fulfil our mandate objectively and responsibly by taking this approach . 
we want to provide transparent and objective information checked by committee members . 
if we want to raise the level of the debate to a more serious level and properly inform Canadians and the government , we have no choice but to adopt this type of approach . 
honourable senators , I do not intend today to address in detail each of the 12 themes included in this study . 
i will speak only of those I consider really important for the deliberations of the committee to examine these issues . 
you have all , I am sure , read the document I gave you in June . 
once they have been informed about all this , the committee will need to invite them to participate so that we may determine what their level of morality is in connection with drugs . 
why do I use the word " morality " , honourable senators ? 
you will understand that by reading the documentation on the history of prohibition in Canada and in the world . 
you will understand that public health issues have never been taken into consideration when the time comes to legislate and to prohibit , and this dates right back to the first prohibition : opium . 
there was never , or hardly ever , any question of public health ; it was very much one of public morality , racism , international trade , the importance of pharmaceutical companies . 
the prohibition we know today was completely a matter of business and of morality . 
Canadians will understand that the signatories of these treaties were somewhat calling the shots for the people of our countries , for the trusting parliamentarians never looked back to see where prohibition had come from . 
we bought what our ancestors had told us , so we continued with prohibition and signed treaties to step up prohibition . 
today we are back in the situation described by Dr. Riley in the report I tabled last June . 
i could speak for a long time on this , but I do not intend to take up any more of your time . 
you have before you the detailed parameters of the mandate I am asking of you for the committee , a three - year mandate . 
as I said , each member would have responsibility for certain facets of the overall mandate and this will be a very demanding task . 
why ? 
because there is a great deal of research in the field . 
it may be the most studied subject in the last half of the 20 th century . 
this will have to be weeded out and concentration focussed on pure scientific research . 
each committee member would have responsibility for one facet of the examination . 
this could easily take close to two years . 
after that , an interim report would have to be produced , informing Canadians of what we have discovered , and sounding out their reactions in order to move to the report stage . 
there will be a federal election along the way . 
i would like to think we will be able to avoid the shoals occasioned by a federal election , especially when it involves such a sensitive issue . 
i prefer , therefore , to have more than less time to do the work and thus avoid being forced to produce a report that would be fed to the politicians , who will be looking for subjects that might arouse the passions of Canadians without their being given all the information necessary . 
on motion of Senator Kenny , debate adjourned . 
fisheries 
committee Authorized to Study Matters Related to Its Mandate 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : pursuant to notice of December 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be authorized to examine and report upon the matters relating to the fishing industry ; 
that the Committee report no later than December 12 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I wish to make a comment on the creation of terms of reference on a broad issue such as fisheries , which is essential and which I support completely . 
we had one last week on agriculture , and one on forestry . 
senator Nolin is asking for one on illicit drugs . 
senator Kirby is asking for one on health services . 
some of these may go on for a year or two . 
in Senator Nolin ' s case , it will be three years . 
before we go too far in the approval of these special studies , we should get an idea of the cost involved , particularly since our committee budget , as far as I know - and I do not think things have changed much in recent years - is always very stretched . 
this is probably the one item on the budget which is most called upon and always underfunded . 
i do not want to put a halt to the study suggested by Senators Comeau and Robichaud . 
however , before we go too far , I feel that we should have some global idea as to how much these studies will cost the Senate and how much we are committing over the next two and three years . 
we may find that we cannot complete some of these studies for lack of funds or lack of foresight . 
senator Comeau : 
the problem with presenting a budget prior to seeking the mandate is that , not having a mandate , we cannot present a budget . 
first , we need to have the mandate , after which we can go back to committee and prepare the budget . 
if the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration feels that we should not proceed with the study , it can be discussed at that point ; however , we simply cannot prepare a budget without having first had a mandate . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I wish to ask a question of the Honourable Senator Comeau . 
i think I know the answer , but let me confirm . 
i believe this motion is being brought with the approval of the members of the committee , and I assume the unanimous approval , but I would appreciate a comment . 
i understand Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s point as well as the one Senator Comeau is making . 
as chair of a committee , it is difficult to know which comes first in these matters . 
in any event , I know the committee did excellent work in the last Parliament on such a reference . 
the committee incorporated into it - and we will come to this at some point in the chamber - a reference to the Estimates to aid it in having a basis for its study . 
i would appreciate a comment on the status of the committee ' s decision in coming to the Senate with this motion . 
senator Comeau : 
honourable senators , the motion to which the Deputy Leader refers , that referring to Estimates , is actually the third motion I shall be making . 
i shall come to that in a few moments . 
the third motion I shall be presenting is that , in the event the Estimates are referred to the committee , we would then need to have the means of depositing them . 
however , for the time being , if the Estimates are not referred to our committee , of course we would not be referring them to the clerk if the Senate is not sitting . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
honourable senators , if I may add a few comments and perhaps reassure the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , when we considered this motion , it involved having quite a broad mandate to enable us to examine all issues relative to fisheries . 
it was clearly understood that , if we were to travel , a budget would be prepared and presented to the Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration so we could comply with the directives given each committee to monitor their spending . 
last year , the Committee on Fisheries and Oceans put off a trip to the West Coast because it could not find the funds to make the trip . 
it is understood that it is not a matter of budget and of traipsing around Canada . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
it was not my intention to cast a shadow over the motion of Senator Comeau . 
i wanted to ask that we be as careful as possible , since our budgets are very limited . 
however laudable the studies proposed , particularly the one to take place over two or three years , it would be a good thing for the Senate to be informed of the costs immediately in order to avoid any unpleasant surprises . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , no other senator wishes to speak . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau , pursuant to notice of December 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be empowered to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau , pursuant to notice of December 2 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
motion agreed to . 
transport and Communications 
committee Authorized to Permit Electronic Coverage 
hon. Lise Bacon , pursuant to notice of December 6 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications be authorised to permit coverage by electronic media of its public proceedings with the least possible disruption of its hearings . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , increasingly , all committees are seeking authorization from the Senate to broadcast their public hearings on the radio and television . 
it has come to the point where we should give a blanket authorization to all committees wishing to proceed in this manner . 
after all , we live in an age when everyone is plugged in , where everyone wants to see and hear what is going on . 
this requirement has become superfluous . 
the Standing Senate Committee on Privileges , Standing Rules and Orders should examine this prerequisite and strike it from the Rules . 
committees should be left to make up their own minds in this regard . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , are there any other senators who wish to speak ? 
hon. Senators : 
No. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
committee Authorized to Engage Services 
hon. Lise Bacon , pursuant to notice of December 6 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications have power to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary for the purpose of its examination and consideration of such bills , subject matters of bills and estimates as are referred to it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , December 8 at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 18 
Wednesday , December 8 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
in Vitro Maturation 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
library of Parliament 
first Report of Standing Joint Committee Presented 
agriculture and Forestry 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
Newfoundland 
changes to School System - Amendment to Term 17 of Constitution - First Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
official Languages 
first Report of Standing Joint Committee Presented 
question PERIOD 
transport 
Fredericton Airport - Status of Negotiations to Turn Over to Local Airport Authority 
Fredericton Airport - Inability of Runway System to Accommodate Certain Aircraft 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Ontario - Regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Unilingual English 
transport 
takeover of Canadian Airlines by Air Canada - Regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
air Canada - Increase in Air Fares 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill - Opposition from Government of Alberta 
transport 
air Canada - Increase in Air Fares 
heritage 
status of Holocaust Memorial Museum 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Adjourned 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( A ) Adopted 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Third Reading 
business of the Senate 
point of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , December 8 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
in Vitro Maturation 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , three weeks ago researchers at McGill University reported that they had helped several couples to conceive babies , even twins , using a new and revolutionary method . 
this method , which facilitates the transformation of a woman ' s immature eggs into embryos is called in vitro maturation . 
IVM is an offshoot of in vitro fertilization , which revolutionized the treatment of infertility in the 1970 s . 
in vitro maturation differs from in vitro fertilization in that , with IVM , the egg is brought to maturation and then fertilized outside the uterus of the mother while , with in vitro fertilization , the already matured egg is fertilized in the laboratory . 
IVM was developed in South Korea and Australia in the early 1990 s , for women whose eggs did not mature naturally . 
until recently , the success rate with IVM was low , but Dr. Seang Lin Tan , Director of the McGill University Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology has changed all that . 
by successfully bringing eggs to maturity outside the body , he has opened the door to new methods of in vitro fertilization with a better success rate than the present 20 per cent . 
this technique seems to work successfully for women who have tried unsuccessfully to achieve a pregnancy with other methods . 
as well , the cost is half that of IVF . 
what wonderful news for the couples who will be able to take advantage of this ! 
however , where does society fit in all this ? 
with all the new reproductive techniques available , the answer to this is that we are uncertain . 
we are very pleased for the couples who will now be able to have children because of this technology . 
however , it is not that simple . 
who should benefit from this technology ? 
who has access to this treatment ? 
what do they need to know before undergoing this treatment ? 
what could the unexpected moral repercussions of this treatment be in the short , medium and long terms ? 
these issues are so complex , and the potential applications of some of these technologies are so vast . 
there is nothing black and white here ; everything is grey . 
in 1993 , the Royal Commission on New Reproductive and Genetic Technology presented their report , with a recommendation for the creation of a national reproductive technologies commission . 
the commission was supposed to do several things . 
first , it was to license institutions , set standards and monitor practices in the use of existing reproductive technology . 
second , the commission was to collect , evaluate and disseminate information to the public on these technologies . 
third , it was to monitor future technologies and practices , and set policy . 
finally , it was supposed to facilitate intergovernmental cooperation in the field . 
unfortunately , this recommendation has not been acted upon by the federal government . 
each time I read or hear of a new reproductive technology emerging in Canada , I regret the absence of the national commission . 
we have no national body to examine the implications these technologies raise or to regulate their use . 
i urge the federal government to review the recommendations of the 1993 royal commission and to act as quickly as possible to establish a national reproductive technology commission . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
hon. Lorna Milne : 
honourable senators , by law and by the Constitution of Canada , the Ontario government is master of all the municipalities of the province , and this present government is bound and determined to make that fact extremely clear . 
unfortunately , the present government in Ontario has never hesitated for a single second to force its will upon the people of this province . 
i must point out that the Government of Ontario has never forced the official description of " bilingual " upon any of its creature municipalities . 
however , Ottawa is a municipality unlike any other . 
it is the national capital of this bilingual country of ours . 
honourable senators , I strongly urge the Government of Ontario to follow the suggestion of Mr. Glen Shortliffe , their special advisor on the restructuring of the Ottawa - Carleton region , and to declare the new amalgamated City of Ottawa , the capital city of Canada , to be officially bilingual . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
library of Parliament 
first Report of Standing Joint Committee Presented 
hon. Louis J . Robichaud , Joint Chairman of the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , December 8 , 1999 
the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament has the honour to present its 
first REPORT 
your Committee recommends that it be authorized to assist the Speaker of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Commons in directing and controlling the Library of Parliament ; and that it be authorized to make recommendations to the Speaker of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Commons regarding the governance of the Library and the proper expenditure of moneys voted by Parliament for the purchase of books , maps or other articles to be deposited therein . 
your Committee recommends that its quorum be fixed at seven ( 7 ) members , provided that both Houses are represented whenever a vote , resolution or other decision is taken , and that the Joint Chairs be authorized to hold meetings to received evidence and authorize printing thereof so long as four ( 4 ) members are present , provided that both Houses are represented . 
your Committee further recommends to the Senate that it be empowered to sit during sittings of the Senate . 
a copy of the relevant Minutes of Proceedings ( Meeting No. 1 ) is tabled . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Robichaud , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
agriculture and Forestry 
first Report of Committee Tabled 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
Newfoundland 
changes to School System - Amendment to Term 17 of Constitution - First Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 of the Rules of the Senate , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Joint Committee on the Amendment of Term 17 of the Terms of Union of Newfoundland , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
official Languages 
first Report of Standing Joint Committee Presented 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Joint Chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on Official Languages , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , December 8 , 1999 
the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages has the honour to present its 
first REPORT 
your Committee which is authorized by section 88 of the Official Languages Act to review on a permanent basis the administration of the Act , any regulations and directives made under the Act and the reports of the Commissioner of Official Languages , the President of the Treasury Board and the Minister of Canadian Heritage , reports , pursuant to rule 104 , that the expenses incurred by the Committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament are as follows . 
your Committee recommends that its quorum be fixed at seven ( 7 ) members , provided that both Houses and the Opposition are represented whenever a vote , resolution or other decision is taken , and that the Joint Chairmen be authorized to hold meetings to receive evidence and authorize the printing thereof so long as four ( 4 ) members are present , provided that both Houses and the Opposition are represented . 
during the session the Committee undertook an examination of Part VII of the Official Languages Act which commits the federal government to supporting and assisting the development of English and French linguistic minority communities in Canada . 
the Committee held 28 meetings and heard 47 witnesses . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Losier - Cool , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
question PERIOD 
transport 
Fredericton Airport - Status of Negotiations to Turn Over to Local Airport Authority 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
the issue of uncertain air service to our smaller communities in Atlantic Canada is now on the minds of many of us from the area . 
however , the Fredericton airport has another problem besides this uncertainty . 
anyone who flies in and out of the Fredericton airport recognizes that it has suffered from some neglect over the years . 
the federal government is negotiating to turn the airport over to local authorities . 
however , the chickens are coming home to roost . 
this neglect has been going on for a long time - approximately 20 years . 
because of the neglect of the physical plant and the disregard for its current needs , according to a report in The Daily Gleaner , the Greater Fredericton Airport Authority has been informed by its consultants that a $ 20 - million investment is required to bring the airport up to present standards , or standards that are required now , shall we say . 
there are even questions about the main runway being too short . 
the federal government is unwilling to make this $ 20 - million investment before transferring responsibility for the airport to the local operators . 
when or if this happens , the local authority is left with little opportunity to succeed . 
another factor is that airport revenues may fall given the restructuring in the airline industry and the possibility of fewer landings . 
the odds of a new operator succeeding are even poorer . 
in my opinion , this is a matter of fairness . 
if the Greater Fredericton Airport Authority is to have a fair chance to succeed in operating the airport , which serves New Brunswick ' s capital city and the central New Brunswick community , the federal government must recognize that its years of treating the airport unfairly must be weighed heavily in the takeover negotiations with the local authority . 
will the Leader of the Government provide this chamber with a status report on these negotiations regarding this serious matter to the residents of Fredericton ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , while I am not familiar with the negotiations with respect to the Fredericton airport , I am aware of the process that has been adopted in other areas of the country . 
i am most familiar with the Halifax airport , where a similar process was undertaken and similar issues were brought to the fore . 
i must pay tribute here to the work of my predecessor in the leader ' s office , Senator Graham , who was largely responsible for a federal government commitment to provide the funding for capital improvements at the Halifax airport . 
obviously , this is a matter which comes under discussion when such negotiations are undertaken . 
certainly , the precedent has been set . 
as to the final result of these particular negotiations , I am certainly not in a position to speculate , but I am aware of the importance of the issue . 
i am prepared to convey the senator ' s concerns to the minister in question . 
senator Robertson : 
minister , I would appreciate that very much , and I am sure other members of the chamber would as well . 
their needs seem to have been met rather well . 
however , we would appreciate a status report on your intervention with the minister to ensure that the Fredericton circumstance is dealt with expeditiously and with a great deal of fairness . 
we look forward to your response on this matter . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am certainly prepared to raise that issue with the Minister of Transport , the Honourable David Collenette . 
as well , when the matter presents itself , I will be pleased to discuss it with my colleague in the Privy Council from the province of New Brunswick . 
Fredericton Airport - Inability of Runway System to Accommodate Certain Aircraft 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
in his discussion with the Minister of Transport regarding the Fredericton airport , could the Leader of the Government draw to Minister Collenette ' s attention the Department of Transport 1992 study which recognized the need to extend the east - west runway to 78,000 feet ? 
currently , that runway can only handle turboprop equipment flying in . 
the southwest runway can handle DC 9 s and the BAC 146 and , when the weather is good , it can handle the regional jet . 
i would ask the minister to raise that matter not only with his colleague the Minister of Transport but also with his colleague the Minister of National Defence . 
in other words , honourable senators , the Canadian Armed Forces Airbuses cannot land at the largest Canadian Forces base in Canada , which seems rather extraordinary . 
when there is troop movement from base Gagetown - the largest Canadian Forces Base not only in Canada but also , in terms of geography , in the British Commonwealth - they must bus in from Moncton , which has a longer runway so that it can handle the Armed Forces Airbuses . 
i wonder whether that second dimension of the need , reflected in the Department of Transport ' s own study of 1992 , and secondly , in the reality that CFB Gagetown is right there and they cannot land their equipment , could be addressed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would be happy to relay the comments of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to the ministers in question . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Ontario - Regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Unilingual English 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
according to Premier Harris and company , the capital of the country would be unilingual English . 
this new City of Ottawa will group under one administration all of the urban municipalities in the region of Ottawa - Carleton . 
this decision by the Harris Conservatives shows just how ignorant they are of the Canadian reality , the reality of a country with two official languages . 
for Canada to have a unilingual national capital is unacceptable and intolerable . 
we would be the only capital in the world rejecting institutional bilingualism . 
i know no other country with two or more official languages that does not respect linguistic duality in its capital . 
can the minister tell us whether the federal government intends to pressure Mr. Harris and his government to respect both official languages , French and English , in our country ' s capital ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the statements which have been made in this place by the honourable senator , as well as by Senator Milne earlier today and by others yesterday , reflect my own view that it is entirely appropriate for the capital of our country to be bilingual . 
while we recognize that municipal government is a responsibility of the provincial authorities , Ottawa is a city unlike any other city in Canada . 
it is the capital of our country . 
before answering on behalf of the government , honourable senators , I wish to indicate my own strongly held personal views that Ottawa must be a bilingual national capital . 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister has spoken out publicly on this issue . 
he will be contacting the Premier of Ontario and very strongly urging the Premier to take the necessary action to ensure that Ottawa becomes the bilingual capital of our country . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I have listened to the response of the Leader of the Government and I agree with him entirely . 
senator Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I understand the government ' s position . 
the Municipality of Ottawa - Carleton is a creation of the provincial government and therefore comes under its jurisdiction . 
nevertheless , in light of the province ' s refusal to declare the national capital bilingual , can the minister say whether the federal government will use its constitutional power or its powers under the Official Languages Act to resolve this situation and ensure that an enlarged City of Ottawa is and remains the nation ' s capital with two official languages ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , it has been the view of very learned individuals , including senators , that , under section 16 of the Constitution Act , there is some jurisdiction for the federal government to intervene in issues of this type . 
i am not pronouncing on that issue from a legal point of view , except to say that the members of the federal government and the Prime Minister are currently reviewing this matter . 
any constitutional issue is complicated and usually requires clear study . 
quite frankly , I think it would be the view of the government that this matter be resolved without any reference to other proceedings through the court system . 
it is hoped that the Premier of Ontario will respond to the very clear expressions of Canadians , including senators who have raised the issue the Prime Minister , and other prominent individuals . 
one would hope that the Premier of Ontario will take those comments seriously , will take them to heart and will change his initial reaction . 
senator Nolin : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i agree with his reply and with what the government is trying to affirm . 
there is no doubt that the question of what is to be done with Hull , which is also part of the National Capital Region , will have to be asked . 
that is another problem entirely . 
what financial assistance is the government prepared to provide in order to ensure that the Government of Ontario does not cite economic reasons for failing to act ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , this is an issue which will require a frank discussion between the Prime Minister and the Premier of Ontario . 
i believe such discussions will take place , and the Prime Minister will know from all the comments that have been made , certainly in this chamber , that we very much support measures to ensure that Ottawa will be a bilingual capital . 
it would be impossible to speculate on the details at this time . 
however , the message has clearly been given . 
it is being taken seriously by the Government of Canada and the Prime Minister . 
one hopes that it will be taken seriously by the Premier of Ontario . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , Queen Victoria decided that Ottawa should be the capital of Canada after considerable deliberation . 
Montreal , Kingston and Toronto were all previous capitals and it did not work in any of those places . 
Ottawa was chosen . 
i agree with Senator Nolin that the addition of Hull to Ottawa would have been preferred , but nonetheless , Ottawa is the capital of Canada . 
i may disagree slightly with my colleague , in that the federal government should give some money or incentive . 
i am asking that Ottawa reflect an ideal . 
i am Canadien fran ç ais du Qu é bec . 
therefore , I say that the federal government should remind the people of Ottawa and the Government of Ontario that this place should truly reflect what it was meant to be , the capital of all Canada . 
i like to be positive , so I suggest that the honourable Leader of the Government reflect , with all his colleagues , on proposing a motion to the Senate , to remind those who are responsible , that Ottawa should reflect what Canada is all about . 
would the Leader of the Government consider a simple resolution of the Senate to remind everyone that Ottawa should stand for all Canadians ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , certainly we will reflect on that suggestion . 
i would also like to associate myself with the remarks the honourable senator made in his preamble . 
the honourable senator was much more eloquent on the subject than I could be , but it certainly is a matter of grave importance to all of us . 
transport 
takeover of Canadian Airlines by Air Canada - Regulation of Possible Monopoly in Air Passenger Industry - Government Policy 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have two or three questions regarding Air Canada and the merger with Canadian Airlines and Air Canada ' s most recent action . 
air Canada has now extended , as we all know , to December 23 , the deadline for the turnover and final settlement of the shares and whatnot . 
while Air Canada did not specify what these problems are in any detail , it did suggest that it would seek regulatory consent , as well as clarification respecting the terms of any new proposed legislation or policy . 
do I take from those general comments that something has been proposed , that the matter has been discussed with Air Canada ' s officials and that we are awaiting further examination of it ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
senator Forrestall : 
that is because it is a CP story . 
senator Boudreau : 
the Transport Committee of the House of Commons has tabled their report . 
senator Kinsella : 
they did not deal with section 47 , though . 
senator Boudreau : 
the Senate Transport and Communications report will , no doubt , be tabled in the very near future . 
both reports may provide some assistance and direction with respect to specific air transportation policy . 
i am aware of the reason for the delay in the Air Canada offer . 
the only information I have at the moment is what I read in The Globe and Mail . 
air Canada - Increase in Air Fares 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , we have seen Air Canada take its second step . 
its first one was a desperate slap in the face to the Government of Canada and to most reasonable Canadians when it suggested that if the government tries to shackle it in any way it will withdraw its offer and the whole merger will collapse . 
there is something now afoot in discussions between the Government of Canada and Air Canada having to do with costing fare structures . 
because of hikes in oil , we just had an across - the - board increase in airfares of 3 per cent , an absolute bloody rip - off . 
they always go up , and never come down . 
no one seems to know why they cannot come down . 
are there ongoing discussions between the Government of Canada and Air Canada with respect to a regulatory process that would justify taking every slot , eliminating competition , and running roughshod over the Canadian traveller by charging an additional 3 per cent ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
the interests of the Canadian public , the small communities throughout our country , and the air traffic consumer will be principal in any discussions with Air Canada . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , can the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us whether Air Canada will be asked to roll back the 3 per cent increase until a decent period of time has passed ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I do not see it as my role to defend the national air carrier . 
however , we are informed that the increase is due to an increase in the cost of fuel , which I believe has gone up 100 per cent over the last number of months . 
if fuel prices come down , we will watch to see whether fares decline as well . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill - Opposition from Government of Alberta 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , my question is directed to the Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
the chairman referred to a letter of December 7 sent to him by two ministers of the Government of Alberta - Shirley McClellan , Minister of International and Intergovernmental Relations , and Walter Paszkowski , Minister of Municipal Affairs - expressing opposition to Bill C - 6 , the protection of personal information bill . 
in this widely circulated letter , which is the second communication from the Alberta government , Alberta is seeking amendments to the bill to strike out those clauses that intrude upon the jurisdiction of provinces , and other points . 
in light of the strong representation made by the Government of Alberta on the jurisdictional question , what is the chairman ' s response to Alberta ' s statement that , if the bill is passed , Alberta may be forced to consider a constitutional challenge to preserve its authority under the Constitution ? 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I will deal with the last question first . 
although some may hold the view that the bill is unconstitutional , including the Government of Alberta , the constitutional expertise available to the committee , and indeed to the government , is strongly of the view that this bill will withstand any constitutional challenge . 
the first question is a little more complicated in that this bill will not apply to intraprovincial activities , provided that the province has a bill substantially similar to the federal law . 
it would be difficult for business to be subject to two different schemes , which would be the case if a province were to pass privacy legislation substantially similar to Bill C - 6 . 
that is obviously a legitimate point of view and that is the rationale for the clause in the federal bill stating that if a province passes substantially similar privacy legislation , the federal bill will not apply in that specific area . 
that leaves the question of whether the draft Alberta bill on health care legislation , for example , is substantially similar . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , questions to chairmen of committees must not be on the subject matter before the committee but purely on the activities of the committee . 
questions regarding the subject matter before committees are not in order . 
senator Roche : 
honourable senators , in light of these difficulties , is there a reason the Alberta government was not called to testify before the committee to make clear its position , given that it originally sent a letter on October 15 , which has now been virtually repeated ? 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , I can confirm this tomorrow , but I understand that several provinces that sent us letters - notably Alberta and Ontario - were asked whether they wanted to appear . 
Ontario sent officials and their Assistant Deputy Minister of Health . 
the minister did not appear . 
it is my understanding , subject to confirmation by the committee clerk , that the Alberta government was asked whether they wanted to appear , and they said that they were content to have their letter be their testimony , rather than appearing in person . 
transport 
air Canada - Increase in Air Fares 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is about Air Canada and the increase in air fares . 
the question has been asked and answered in part , but I should like to direct a supplementary question to the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in today ' s National Post , Laura Cooke , a spokesperson for Air Canada , is quoted as saying , in relation to the increased air fares , that tickets to the United States and other international destinations were exempted and that the fares did not increase for competitive reasons . 
therefore , if we have a monopoly in Canada with no competition for Air Canada , will we have continued increases in air fares ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I can neither confirm nor deny the information brought forward by Senator Oliver . 
however , I will seek further information and respond as quickly as possible . 
senator Oliver : 
does the minister not agree that it is shocking that the Canadian airline will increase domestic fares but not international fares ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , it is surprising , to say the least , and is an issue worthy of further attention . 
heritage 
status of Holocaust Memorial Museum 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I gave notice last week of the question I am about to ask . 
i have been approached by groups concerned about the status of the Holocaust memorial museum . 
could the Leader of the Government in the Senate provide us with an update on the status of that museum ? 
does the government remain committed to the principle of establishing such a museum ? 
if so , when can we expect to see some activity on this file ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the commemoration of that horrendous event in the history of humanity is a matter of great importance . 
unfortunately , I cannot comment on it in detail today . 
with apologies to the honourable senator , perhaps I can do so as early as tomorrow . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
third Reading - Motion in Amendment - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I indicated to you yesterday that I intended to propose an amendment at the third reading stage of this bill . 
perhaps it would be a good idea for me to read the amendment and then I will speak to it . 
i move , seconded by Honourable Senator Doody : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
senator Murray : 
how much time do I have to speak ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
as you are the first speaker at third reading stage of the bill , you have 45 minutes . 
on the other hand , I must point out that there is an order of the house that the Senate will rise at 3:30 . 
senator Murray : 
thank you , Your Honour . 
honourable senators , I refer you to clause 7 ( 1 ) which says : 
for the purpose of clause 4.3 of Schedule I , and despite the note that accompanies that clause , an organization may collect personal information without the knowledge or consent of an individual only if ... 
these are quite valid reasons and any reasonable person would agree that they are sufficient to justify the disclosure of personal information collected for commercial purposes . 
however , we then move into several rather more dubious circumstances that are outlined in the bill . 
before I come to the paragraph that I have moved to delete , I want to recite two of the dubious circumstances . 
one is contained in subparagraph ( f ) where it would be legal to disclose personal information without the consent of the person about whom it was collected : 
... for statistical or scholarly study or research , purposes that cannot be achieved without disclosing the information , it is impracticable to obtain consent and the organization informs the Commissioner of the disclosure before the information is disclosed . 
there is nothing said here whether the commissioner can halt the process or do anything about it . 
his right in this subparagraph is simply to be informed when information about an individual collected for commercial reasons will be released " for statistical , or scholarly study ... " . 
subparagraph ( g ) makes it legal to disclose personal information collected by a business if it is : 
... made to an institution whose functions include the conservation of records of historic or archival importance , and the disclosure is made for the importance of such conservation . 
this is personal information that is collected about you , or about any individual , by business firms in the course of their activity - for example , your mortgage information , your credit card information , and your pharmaceutical record . 
it says here that that information on you should be disclosed " for statistical , or scholarly study " or in subparagraph ( g ) for " historic or archival importance " . 
i should like to deal with this issue en passant . 
in most cases this is not about an ordinary citizen . 
this is a right to get at the personal business of people who are prominent , whether they be in politics , the arts , or whatever . 
this will allow open season on them . 
i think it is about time we drew the line . 
prominent people have as much right as anybody else to privacy . 
under subparagraphs ( f ) and ( g ) , these people will still be alive to object . 
they will be able , one assumes , to go to the commissioner or the courts , or have some legal recourse , to protect their personal and private information . 
the paragraph on which I have concentrated , and that I would like to see deleted , is the provision under subparagraph ( h ) that personal information can be released if the disclosure is : 
what is the principled justification for a provision of that kind in this bill ? 
in the briefing book that was given to members of the committee by the government , the background of this clause is set out as follows : 
the Privacy Act deals with this issue by defining personal information of a person who has been deceased for twenty years as not being personal information for the purposes of the Act . 
the approach in this legislation is more restrictive , permitting disclosure but not removing it from the ambit of the legislation . 
it is true that the Privacy Act passed a few years ago protects the privacy of individuals with respect to personal information about themselves held by a government institution . 
indeed , it does exempt from its protections information about an individual who has been dead for more than 20 years . 
as I said on several other occasions , there may be good public policy reasons for disclosing information about individuals that is held by governments after 20 years , or sending the information to the archives , but that is not the bill we are debating today . 
we are debating a bill concerning personal information collected in the private business sector about people and whether there should be a provision of that kind . 
when the officials were before the committee , I asked Stephanie Perrin , Director , Privacy Policy , Electronic Commerce Task Force , Department of Industry , about this , and I said : 
am I correct in my reading of this section and subsection that personal information collected by an organization - your bank , your credit card company , your mortgage company , your insurance company , whatever - could be disclosed 20 years after the death of the person about whom it was collected ? 
am I correct in my reading of that ? 
Ms Perrin : 
that says you need not seek the consent of the individual for that disclosure . 
however , all disclosures must be justified with the purpose clause , so there must be a legitimate purpose for the disclosure of that information . 
there are still a number of tests . 
this merely says that you need not seek consent to disclose . 
a little later , she said : 
you must state your purposes , if you are an organization , for the collection , use and disclosure of personal information . 
i went back to the bill to see what she was talking about . 
i came to clause 5 , which is really not very helpful at all because it just refers to Schedule 1 and states about Schedule 1 that : 
the word " should " , when used in Schedule 1 , indicates a recommendation and does not impose an obligation . 
i then went to Schedule 1 , the so - called purpose clause . 
the purpose clause has mostly to do with the collection of information , not with its disclosure . 
that clause states that it should be read in conjunction with clause 4.5 of Schedule 1 , entitled " Limiting Use , Disclosure and Retention . " 
thus , I went to that clause , and what did I find ? 
i found two or three paragraphs stating that organizations " should " develop guidelines and implement procedures with respect to the retention of personal information . 
i found another one which states : 
personal information that is no longer required to fulfil the identified purposes should be destroyed , erased , or made anonymous . 
all that is not much help in the face of a provision that provides that it would be legal to disclose personal information that is collected for commercial reasons 20 years after you have died . 
then Ms Perrin and I got right down to the nitty - gritty , and I want honourable senators to listen to this . 
this clause is basically for historical purposes and archives . 
you obviously have not heard yet from the archivist and historian community . 
why would we need to ? 
their interests have been taken care of . 
she continued : 
they feel very strongly that if we do not have a clause that permits private organizations , businesses and institutions to disclose information to historical institutions for the preservation of historical records , that much valuable information will be destroyed . 
there are provisions in the bill to retain the information only as long as is necessary for the purposes for which it was gathered , so there is a strong push on institutions to destroy information that is no longer necessary . 
an insurance company , for instance , if they are not doing business with you and there is no longer a need , would be strongly impelled by the schedule to dispose of that information . 
nevertheless , some information is of historical interest . 
an example that has been used in letters to our minister on this very clause is the Hudson ' s Bay archives that were recently donated . 
cut up your Bay credit card , honourable senators . 
those were company records . 
if you put in a clause which says that if you no longer have a use for the information , the information must be destroyed or deleted , then who will keep these records ? 
there is still a threshold there for the bank and the insurance company to prove that their purpose is indeed the retention of historically interesting information . 
she tries to make a principled justification , but I do not think that is acceptable . 
let me come back to that . 
we are dealing with an individual ' s personal business and personal information that was collected for commercial reasons . 
it is suggested that there might be good historical reasons for putting the business of Jean Chr é tien , or his successor or his predecessors , whether it is credit card information , mortgage information or pharmaceutical records , into an archive somewhere . 
i say it is none of our business . 
i say that this kind of personal information is none of anybody ' s business . 
further , I say that we must understand the mentality , and I say that with some respect . 
i hope I will always have some respect for learning and for science , including the social sciences , but we must understand the mentality of social scientists , archivists , historians and all the rest . 
they would have us save every last scrap of paper . 
they would have us preserve every last jot and tittle of information because they believe it is all relevant , no matter how personal or intimate . 
they will never agree that any scrap of it should be destroyed , especially if it deals with someone who may be considered of some importance , either now or in history . 
they insist that it is theirs . 
i must say also that some of the witnesses from the privacy advocacy groups and the civil libertarians came conspicuously ill - prepared on this point . 
i do not think they had focused on it . 
i asked a man by the name of Murray Mollard , Policy Director of the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association , what he thought about it . 
he said : 
i do not think we have an official position on your question . 
this may or may not have to do somewhat with some of the census debate that has been ongoing . 
it has nothing to do with the census . 
we are talking about commercial matters . 
he then said : 
my intuitive response is that 20 years is not a long time . 
why it has been chosen as 20 years , I do not know . 
then a bit later he said : 
perhaps my colleagues have something to add . 
i do not understand the justification for that . 
the figure of 20 years strikes me as being not a long time . 
i alluded yesterday to the testimony of a lawyer by the name of Ian Lawson from British Columbia , who is an expert in privacy law , and a relative of our colleague Senator Kelly , I may say en passant . 
he said : 
i may live to regret saying this , but the right of privacy is usually assigned to a living person . 
i am speaking about how we consider the interests at stake . 
in fact , when it comes to litigating and to enforcing rights of privacy , I wonder whether it would be possible at all for a person ' s interest to be at stake if that person is deceased . 
think about it , honourable senators . 
i differ with Mr. Lawson in this regard . 
there are all sorts of ramifications for the survivors of that individual as well . 
however , the sensitivity of personal information declines over time . 
perhaps it does , but that is no justification for releasing it , in my opinion . 
she went on to say : 
it is a question of the appropriate time limit . 
i am not uncomfortable with a time limit . 
it may be that 20 years is not an appropriate time limit . 
she is not taking a position on principle . 
to her , it is a question of the time limit . 
fortunately , the Commissioner of Privacy , Mr. Phillips , was much more forthcoming . 
i remind you that Mr. Phillips was just about the most aggressive and robust supporter of this bill before the committee . 
i asked him to justify this provision . 
i will read you the exchange . 
i said : 
... i invite you to offer us a principle justification for the provision in this bill that personal information collected for commercial purposes can be legally disclosed 20 years after the death of the person in respect of whom it was collected . 
justify that for us . 
Mr. Phillips : 
i will not try . 
that provision is the same one found in the existing Privacy Act . 
it is written by people who obviously believe that privacy rights expire at the grave . 
senator Murray : 
we had a lawyer tell us that today . 
Mr. Phillips : 
if that is so and if that is an accepted principle in law , I think it is an unhappy one . 
i take a different view . 
i have learned in my experiences as a Privacy Commissioner that many people are very concerned about personal information which may linger on after their death and what happens to it . 
we need only consider the example of the enormous lengths taken by many people regarding the security and inviolability of their personal papers post - mortem . 
the assumption that people do not have a privacy right simply because they are dead , in my opinion , is a very poor one . 
this argument , as we both know , is coming up in another context . 
it is now in the Privacy Act that , 20 years after your death , personal information does not qualify . 
senator Murray : 
there is no reason to apply it to the commercial sector as this bill does , is there ? 
Mr. Phillips : 
i do not draw a distinction between any kind of information . 
it is what the owner thinks about it , senator . 
you are right . 
the question is why ? 
he answered : 
i am told that the provision to which you have made reference is a standard archival rule . 
any disclosure would still have to comply with the rest of the code . 
for example , the disclosure of the personal information must be made for the purposes for which it was collected . 
the minister is obviously mistaken , or he did not understand my question . 
if the information is collected for reasons of your credit card application or your mortgage or your prescription at the pharmacy , that is one thing . 
we are talking about disclosing it for the purposes of the archives or for statistical reasons or for scholarly research or whatever it is . 
i do not think he quite understood the issue that I was raising . 
honourable senators , I have said on several occasions that I think the government and the Parliament that passes this bill can take some considerable pride in it . 
it does extend the protection of privacy law for personal information collected in the private commercial sector . 
however , a provision which allows disclosure 20 years after your death is , I think , a black mark on an otherwise excellent piece of legislation . 
no one has offered a principled defence of this provision , and I think it is indefensible . 
we all know that individual privacy has been losing ground day by day and year by year . 
that has been the experience to date . 
that is the significance of the clause that I want to see eliminated from this bill . 
the right to collect and disseminate information should not trump every other right in the book . 
we can let this clause go through and hope that it will always be used responsibly and with respect for the apparently non - existent legal rights of people who have passed on , or we can draw the line now and protect , as we should , the privacy of those people with regard to purely personal information collected by their bankers , their mortgage firms , their pharmacists and what have you . 
i hope that we will draw the line and strike this clause from the bill . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I must inform you that if Honourable Senator Kirby speaks now , his speech would have the effect of closing debate . 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , I was about to speak to the amendment , but in any event I would have adjourned the debate . 
as I understand the procedure , it is the amendment , not the third reading motion , that is on the floor . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
you may speak on the amendment . 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , given the usual entertainment value , thoughtfulness and cogency of Senator Murray ' s argument , I would not want to reply extemporaneously this afternoon but would want to reply tomorrow afternoon . 
i move the adjournment of the debate . 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , I was seeking the floor a moment ago to ask permission to ask a question of Senator Murray . 
is that agreeable ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Roche : 
this question concerns Senator Murray ' s excellent address , for which I thank him . 
that letter refers to and enlarges upon an earlier letter the Alberta government sent on November 16 to the Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
it is quite a strong letter of protest against Bill C - 6 . 
i will not read the letter , although I am prepared to make it available . 
i do not have it in both languages , but I am prepared to make it available if any senator has not yet received it . 
in short , Alberta is urging that this bill be reconsidered and that there be stricken from the bill those sections that intrude upon the jurisdiction of provinces to enable small - and medium - sized businesses to adequately prepare for the legislation and to enable a consultative process to be renewed to achieve the goal of privacy protection . 
that , in essence , is what Alberta is seeking . 
the normal process is to appear before a committee while it is reviewing the bill in question . 
i do not want to get into any protracted discussion here about why Alberta did or did not appear before the committee . 
it appears that they might have assumed that the letter of November 16 was being taken into consideration by the committee , and , indeed , it may well have been . 
does the Honourable Senator Murray feel that the amendment that he has just introduced - and , I listened carefully as he outlined the limiting quality of the amendment - respond in an adequate manner to the points raised by the Government of Alberta ? 
if not , what should we do about it at this stage ? 
we have a province that has a key interest in this bill , such that their views should not be overridden by not giving sufficient consideration to them before this bill is passed by the Senate for a third time . 
senator Murray : 
first , I do not believe that the Government of Alberta focused on the particular clause that I seek to have deleted from the bill . 
second , I should tell my friend that , during the second reading debate , I expressed a layman ' s opinion , for what it is worth , that the bill represents a valid and legitimate exercise of the federal government ' s trade and commerce power . 
third , a more authoritative view on that matter was expressed before the committee the other day , by Mr. Tass é , a former deputy minister of justice who is of the view that the bill is intra vires the federal Parliament . 
fourth , there is in the bill a provision that the bill will not apply to intraprovincial commerce in any province that , within the next three years , has passed a privacy bill that is " substantially similar " . 
fifth , while I am aware that all the attorneys general of Canada , some considerable time ago , asked that the bill be withdrawn for the reasons outlined by the Government of Alberta , that has not been done . 
the Government of Ontario came before the committee to express their reservations about various aspects of the bill , but the officials declined to express a view or to state that there is an Ontario view as to the constitutionality of the bill . 
when asked specifically about this , they simply said it was a matter for debate . 
one witness before the committee said that it is inevitable that there will be a constitutional challenge to this bill , and , I suppose , he will probably be proven right . 
senator Roche : 
i thank Senator Murray for that reply . 
he referred to an approach to resolving this difficulty through provincial legislation that would be substantially similar to the federal legislation . 
that is one of the points that Alberta makes in the letter , namely , that because " substantially similar " is not defined in the federal legislation , it is too wide for relevant , responding legislation to be made . 
senator Murray : 
honourable senators , I do not disagree with the point that the Government of Alberta has made about the fact that the phrase " substantially similar " could have a rather broad meaning . 
however , I should point out that the only province that has a law which is comparable is Quebec . 
the government , through the Minister of Industry , has already indicated that , so far as the government is concerned , the Quebec law is substantially similar . 
as for the others , three years is provided for consultation and discussion . 
i understand that Alberta is drafting a bill , as we speak . 
they are not left simply to guesswork . 
they can and do discuss these matters extensively with the federal government . 
my recollection , from another life , is that Alberta has extraordinarily able public service advisers in the field of federal - provincial relations . 
i would think that it would not be beyond imagination and goodwill for Alberta to draft and for Ottawa to accommodate a bill tailored to Alberta ' s needs , but substantially similar to the federal legislation . 
on motion of Senator Kirby , debate adjourned . 
criminal Records Act 
bill to Amend - Third Reading 
honourable senators , we are by now quite familiar with the content of Bill C - 7 , which is an important bill . 
it was before us in the last session and it is again before us . 
it has benefited in the interim tremendously by the work of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , which found some serious flaws in the original version of the bill . 
the Solicitor General responded with admirable openness and rapidity in accommodating amendments to improve the bill . 
as it now stands , I think it is a very valuable addition to Canadian law . 
this bill will essentially help to protect Canadian children and other vulnerable persons from finding themselves in positions where they might be prayed upon by sexual offenders . 
honourable senators , it is important to note that there will be major safe guards for the pardon - holder ' s rights . 
we take the integrity of the pardon system very seriously . 
access to the offender ' s information will be limited to authorized police officers and to law enforcement personnel . 
the applicant for the position will have to sign a consent form , even to check whether a notation exists in the general criminal records section . 
that consent form will point out that this person is in the section that is normally sealed that refers to pardoned offenders . 
discovery of that special notation will be possible only by a special code is entered into the computer terminal . 
these are serious safeguards . 
in addition , thanks to the work of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , the bill specifies now that it applies only to persons pardoned for sexual offences . 
pardons for all other offences will remain sealed . 
definitions which are now in the bill have been greatly improved . 
definitions of " children " and " vulnerable persons " are now in the bill . 
given that this bill has been supported by all parties in the other place , by provincial and territorial ministers of justice and law enforcement authorities throughout Canada , I believe it merits our support . 
motion agreed to and bill , as amended , read third time and passed . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
report of National Finance Committee on Supplementary Estimates ( A ) Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance ( Supplementary Estimates " A " , 1999 - 2000 ) , presented in the Senate on December 2 , 1999 . 
hon. Anne C . Cools , for Senator Murray , moved the adoption of the report . 
she said : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak briefly to this most important motion and , in essence , to the second report of our National Finance Committee , being the report on the consideration of Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , 1999 - 2000 . 
honourable senators will find that this report is thorough and contains significant detail on our committee ' s deliberations . 
i would say that this report is the committee ' s best commendation . 
the National Finance Committee is the Estimates committee of the Senate , that committee which assists the Senate in fulfilling its parliamentary obligations in respect of the Senate ' s examination of the government ' s proposed and the revised proposed expenditures . 
the committee met on Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 , to hear from Treasury Board officials Mr. Richard Neville and Mr. Andrew Lieff . 
these two gentlemen were most forthcoming in their testimony and answered senators ' questions with enormous care and attention . 
Mr. Neville informed us that he is moving on from his present position to assume the duties of the deputy comptroller general . 
he also informed us that he would be assuming these new duties around the beginning of December . 
i believe that I speak for all senators on the committee and for all senators in the chamber when I express our gratitude and our appreciation for his contributions and assistance to our committee during these past years , and I think I speak for all senators when I wish him success in the future . 
honourable senators , I should like also to take the opportunity to thank all the honourable members of the committee for what I consider to be their diligent attention to Supplementary Estimates ( A ) , and I thank them for all their hard work . 
i should like also to thank Senator Lowell Murray for his steady , balanced and practised hand in guiding the committee during its deliberations . 
i should like also to take the opportunity to welcome to the committee two new senators - Senator Finnerty and Senator Finestone . 
senator Finestone informs me that she had not intended to stay on that committee but , since she attended her first meeting , she concluded that it was a good committee on which to serve . 
having said that , honourable senators , I recommend this report for your adoption . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . - ( 
honourable Senator Lavoie - Roux ) 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I wish to speak to the second reading stage of Bill S - 2 , standing in the name of Senator Lavoie - Roux . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Losier - Cool : 
the health demographic is , without a doubt , constantly changing . 
since 1997 , 40 per cent of Canadians under the age of 30 are caregivers to at least one family member . 
in Canada at this time , the average time an adult will spend on caring for a relative is longer than the time spent on child - rearing . 
given our constantly ageing population , honourable senators , it is time for an initiative such as this bill to be undertaken in Canada . 
today I would like to call your attention to Clause 6 of this bill , which is aimed at coordinating , with provincial authorities and associations of health care professionals , the establishment of national guidelines for the withholding and withdrawal of life - sustaining medical treatments , for the controlling of pain , and for palliative care ; and at promoting and encouraging public education regarding the controlling of pain by medical means and increasing the training of health care professionals in controlling pain and in palliative care . 
honourable senators , it is the duty of the federal government to establish standards on the quality of palliative care , as well as accessibility for all Canadians requiring such care . 
palliative care should be integrated with other health services , and , ideally , should be more or less the same from one region to another . 
as Dr. James McGregor of the Ontario Palliative Care Association pointed out to the Special Senate Committee on Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide : 
it is society ' s responsibility through government , health care planners , professional organizations , and health professions to provide the resources to ensure a system of intensive caring for dying patients and their families . 
this necessitates the development of the field of palliative care to ensure that the appropriate expertise is widely and readily available as well as accessible to all ... 
it is unfortunate that Canadians continue to die in pain because this expertise is not available to them . 
honourable senators , the establishment of national palliative care standards would meet the needs of the sickest members of our society . 
i wish to underscore the importance of Senator Carstairs ' initiative , which would promote a comprehensive approach and would make palliative care services effective and accessible throughout Canada . 
the purpose of palliative care is to address not just the physical needs , but also the psychological , social , cultural , emotional and spiritual needs of individuals and their families . 
palliative care helps the terminally ill live out their remaining days in comfort and dignity . 
it is invaluable at the end of people ' s lives and in the earlier stages of illness . 
a Globe and Mail article published on December 7 , 1999 stated that four out of five Canadians believe home care should be a free universal health care program . 
the poll also stated that one - quarter of patients already pay significant expenses and that one in nine patients needing help say that they have no home care because they cannot afford it . 
most respondents to this poll said that the level of care fell short because of government - imposed caps on the number of paid care hours allowed and because they could not afford supplementary help . 
that having been said , we should develop quality palliative care that meets people ' s needs and make it as widely available as possible . 
i should like to cite Dr. Ferguson , chief of the New Brunswick extra - mural hospital program , in order to illustrate the need to institutionalize palliative care as part of health care in Canada . 
he said : 
in many provinces , homecare has been developed more or less as a project or program . 
with us [ in New Brunswick ] , it is part of the system . 
we like to think that we have a different approach to it , and we are encouraging it to be used more effectively . 
that is our objective , at any rate . 
i am proud that my province of New Brunswick is a leader in the development of palliative care in Canada . 
i hope that , with the support of the Senate and of the House of Commons , we will be able to adopt such standards Canada - wide . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other senator wishes to speak , this item will stand in the name of Senator Lavoie - Roux . 
Canadian District of the Moravian Church of America 
private Bill to Amend Act of Incorporation - Third Reading 
honourable Senator Corbin ) 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
business of the Senate 
point of Order - Speaker ' s Ruling 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , before we move to the adjournment motion , yesterday I raised a point of order with Senator Kinsella regarding the acceptability of a committee report being presented by a member of a committee who , it appears , was not authorized to do so on behalf of the committee . 
i understood that His Honour would be ruling on that because the Foreign Affairs Committee has already called a meeting to discuss the matter contained in that report . 
i want to ensure that the issue is settled before that committee gets involved in the study of a report that has been sent to it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , actions within committees are outside of my responsibility . 
what committees do is up to committees . 
however , insofar as reporting , I refer you to rule 97 ( 1 ) , which states : 
a report from a select committee shall be presented by the chairman of the committee or by a Senator designated by the chairman . 
when a report is presented , I have no authority to question whether the senator presenting has been designated . 
i must depend upon the committee chairman to have done that . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
the exchange yesterday with Senator Tkachuk , the deputy chairman , revealed that Senator Hervieux - Payette was not designated by the committee to present the report . 
hon. Leo E . Kolber : 
honourable senators , I was to present the report last week but then was told to wait . 
i could have done it today , but not yesterday . 
the desire was to have it done yesterday . 
therefore , I delegated , as I believe is my right , Senator Hervieux - Payette to do so . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
the rule is quite clear . 
it is not the chairman who delegates , but the committee . 
his Honour just quoted rule 97 ( 1 ) . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the rule states that the designation is made by the chairman . 
again , it reads : 
a report from a select committee shall be presented by the chairman of the committee or by a Senator designated by the chairman . 
the chairman has said that he gave his authorization , and I have no authority to go behind that . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I do not wish to delay the study of this bill . 
i apologize to Senator Kolber for suggesting that his committee had perhaps not proceeded properly . 
the second question raised was how a report could be transferred , during Routine Proceedings , from this chamber to another committee without the chamber having any say in the matter . 
if senators would prefer that I be entertained by the Speaker outside of these deliberations in order that we can proceed to other work at 3:30 , I would be happy to ask Senator Hays to proceed with the adjournment motion . 
however , I feel it is important for all honourable senators to know exactly the procedure that is being followed and an explanation for it when we show , like I do , some confusion over it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if honourable senators are prepared to hear me , I will attempt to clarify the second element of the point of order . 
this goes back to last week , and I read from the Journals of the Senate of November 24 respecting the Senate ' s decision with regard to Bill S - 3 : 
the Bill was then read the second time . 
the Honourable Senator Hays moved , seconded by the Honourable Senator Mercier , that the Bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
there was then some debate , following which : 
with leave of the Senate and pursuant to Rule 30 the motion was modified to read as follows : 
that the Bill be referred to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce and to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
the question being put on the motion as modified , it was adopted . 
honourable senators , I must say that this is a most unusual procedure . 
certainly , to send one bill to two committees is not good practice . 
after all , how is that done ? 
therefore , it was sent , as I understand it , to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
the committee studied the bill and no amendments were proposed . 
the bill was reported back . 
i must refer you , then , to rule 97 ( 4 ) , which states : 
when a committee reports a bill without amendment , such report shall stand adopted without any motion , and the Senator in charge of the bill shall move that it be read a third time on a future day . 
however , there was an instruction from the Senate , which I have just read to honourable senators , that that the bill was to be referred to the other committee . 
thus , having been reported by one committee without amendment , I concluded that it should not then proceed to third reading because it still had to go to the other committee . 
that is what the Senate decided . 
there had to be a mechanism to move it to the other committee , and that is what was stated in the motion . 
i do not know how else the report could have been handled in view of the decision of the Senate the previous week . 
i was locked in by the decision of the Senate to send the report to two committees . 
i do not know what other vehicle could have been used to achieve the decision of the Senate . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
i would have been more comfortable had the report been tabled and , when third reading was called , the Senate would have decided , to be consistent with its decision , to then say , " No third reading . 
we have decided to send it to committee . " 
i felt that the Speaker bypassed the Senate . 
to some , it may be technical and it may be petty , but I think it is important that we , as senators , continue to be masters of the direction of a bill or a report . 
i appreciate the situation in which the government side has placed His Honour , since it was their decision to send the bill to two committees . 
senator Hays clarified the situation on the second day . 
whenever the government side suggests to send the same bill to two committees , honourable senators can be sure that we will be the first to object . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , since we have a few minutes before we adjourn , I should like to take advantage of this opportunity as the person responsible for this novel procedure , one which I believe has the potential of working very well , to say a few words about it . 
i have been criticized constructively by my colleagues , by His Honour and also by the other author , shall I say , of this procedure , although I do not think he will accept credit for it . 
the point I wish to make is that this circumstance is unusual . 
however , the instruction given by the Senate was clear enough that the Speaker ' s interpretation of it is appropriate . 
i believe that is where the potential confusion lies . 
the way in which we in this chamber attempted to deal with that question , at my suggestion , was with the wording that the bill be sent to the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , which was done , and upon completion of their review , which occurred , that it be sent to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs for further review . 
what was not done was to say how the matter could be dealt with by the Senate so as to avoid procedural difficulty by having successive reports . 
i think the solution that came from His Honour was a good one . 
it was that the instruction be characterized as a special order of the Senate that was moved with leave on November 24 and , notwithstanding rule 97 ( 4 ) , the bill stands referred to Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
this follows exactly the instruction the Senate gave to the two committees charged with the responsibility to deal with the bill . 
accordingly , honourable senators , I feel that this process is working and that it will work . 
i appreciate the concerns of Senator Lynch - Staunton and others about this not being a good practice . 
however , it is one that we have tried . 
i am not sure we will ever try it again . 
in any event , based on what I have said and what His Honour has provided to avoid the problems of dealing with it in this chamber , I believe the process will work . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to rule 101 , which states : 
the chairman of the committee shall sign or initial a printed copy of the bill on which the amendments are clearly written ... 
i cannot seem to find the rule , although I know it is the practice , that a bill that is reported without amendment is also signed . 
indeed , yesterday , the bill arrived at the Table unsigned . 
we inquired about that , after which it was sent back to Senator Hervieux - Payette who signed it . 
does the principle of rule 101 that speaks to the chairman of the committee signing the bill apply also to a bill that is reported without amendment ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in answer to the Honourable Senator Kinsella , I do not know at the moment if there is a rule which sets that out . 
my understanding is that the practice has been that the chairman of the committee signs the bill when it is deposited with the Table . 
i do not see the bills when they are presented . 
i am sure the Table checks to see if they are signed . 
if they are not , I am sure the Table contacts the chairman of the committee . 
senator Kinsella : 
the chairman was not here . 
therefore , it was signed by another member of the committee . 
senator Kolber : 
honourable senators , I will be happy to sign it . 
senator Hays : 
senator Kinsella has noted what may be a deficiency . 
senator Kolber ' s suggestion is a good one . 
senator Kinsella : 
my interest is to protect the rights of the minority in this place . 
most of the chairmen of committees are senators on the government side . 
a few are on this side , as are the deputy chairmen . 
in the absence of the chairman , the deputy chairman of the committee should act in place of the chairman . 
senator Kolber : 
rule 101 refers to a bill that has been amended . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
we want the government side simply to respect the minority . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
it might be useful if the Table were to clarify this matter and send a message to all committee clerks so that there is no confusion . 
now , I wish to address the point raised by the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , who said that he would have preferred that the bill be called for third reading . 
if that were done , I think we would have been in contravention of the decision of the Senate , which was that the bill be sent to the two committees . 
when a bill is passed without amendment , there is no discussion . 
it must go immediately to third reading . 
had that been done , we could not have sent this bill to the other committee , as the Senate had decided . 
that was the difficulty in which we found ourselves . 
honourable senators , pursuant to the order of the Senate , it being 3:30 p.m. , I do now leave the Chair . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 19 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Refusal by Premier 
fisheries and Oceans 
viability of West Coast Salmon Fishery - Need for Emergency Help - Hunger Strike by Dan Edwards 
m é decins du Monde 
international Day of Human Rights 
fisheries and Oceans 
closure of Fraser River Sockeye Fishery - Program to Refund Salmon Licence Fees - Hunger Strike by Dan Edwards 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Position of the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
a Senator ' s Guide to Disability Tabled 
Quebec 
linguistic School Boards - Amendment to Section 93 of the Constitution - First Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Airline - Second Report Presented 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
report of Committee 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
report of Foreign affairs Committee 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
second Report of Committee Presented 
scrutiny of Regulations 
first report of Joint Committee Presented 
child Custody and Access 
first Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Adopt Recommendation to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Notice of Inquiry 
the Senate 
notice of Motion to Uphold Royal Assent Proceedings 
question PERIOD 
transport 
divestiture of Public Wharves - Assignment of Wharf on Thetis Island to Indian Band on Kuper Island 
national Defence 
problems with Engines of Patrol Frigates 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Timing of Announcement 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill - Opposition from Government of Alberta 
environment 
Alberta - Announcement to Process Imported Hazardous Waste at Swan Hills Treatment Centre - Government Policy 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Response by Government 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
justice 
cost of Gun Registration Program - Responsibility of Minister 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Request for Copy of Statement of Requirements 
visitor in the Gallery 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
third Reading 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
library of Parliament 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
official Languages 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
review of Anti - Drug Policy 
motion to Form Special Senate Committee - Debate Continued 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
motion to Instruct Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee to Divide Bill into Two Bills - Order Withdrawn 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
motion Authorizing National Finance Committee to Study Estimates - Motion in Amendment - Order Stands 
la Francophonie Summit 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned - Order Stands 
human Rights and Multi - Ethnic Conflicts 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
library of Parliament 
motion to Authorize Standing Joint Committee to Meet During Sittings of the Senate Withdrawn 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Health Care System - Debate Adjourned 
adjournment 
the SENATE 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Proposal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Refusal by Premier 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I am not surprised at the decision by the Ontario government of Mr. Harris to reject the recommendation of his advisor on municipal and regional restructuring . 
this is standard behaviour for Mr. Harris and company when francophone rights are involved . 
for over 40 years , I have been dealing with this issue in education , health , social services and now municipal affairs . 
i have always been involved and I intend to continue to do my work . 
let me tell you , the issue is far from resolved . 
yesterday , Mr. Harris said , according to the media , that he had done a lot for French Canadians in Ontario . 
what he is not saying is that , each time , every gain in the areas of education , health , and municipal affairs has been imposed on him either by the courts or by public opinion . 
he has come repeatedly to the federal government hat in hand for funds to pay for these changes . 
honourable senators , we will use whatever measures are necessary and at our disposal to get the Ontario government of Mr. Harris to change its opinion and position and make Ottawa , the country ' s capital , bilingual . 
let us be positive , honourable senators , and let the new city administration decide how it will be bilingual . 
honourable senators , we will use incentives . 
we will recommend that he correct his affront to equity and justice and honour the equality of the two official languages in the country ' s capital city . 
Mr. Harris is playing a dangerous game when he insults French Canadians , thereby handing certain people winning conditions . 
enough foolishness ! 
Mr. Harris , we are not impressed ! 
fisheries and Oceans 
viability of West Coast Salmon Fishery - Need for Emergency Help - Hunger Strike by Dan Edwards 
hon. Pat Carney : 
honourable senators , this week , a man who is putting his life on the line to help the people of British Columbia ' s coastal communities was in my office asking for assistance from the federal government and the Senate . 
Dan Edwards , a fisherman from the West Coast of Vancouver Island , is on day 45 of a hunger strike to draw attention to our coastal communities that were economically and socially devastated by the collapse this year of the Fraser River sockeye runs . 
Mr. Edwards met with Senator Ray Perrault , Senator Gerry Comeau and myself to describe his frustration . 
all Dan asks to get off the hunger strike is for the federal government to sit down at the negotiating table with the provincial government and the stakeholders and resolve a way to get assistance into the hands of the people in the communities who desperately need it . 
so far , federal funds are aimed at getting people to leave the fishery , not at helping fishermen struggling to stay afloat . 
honourable senators , there will be no viable West Coast fishery if all fishermen with the necessary expertise and experience are forced out of the fishery because of the buyback program . 
we need fishermen to have a viable fishery . 
the Auditor General supports Dan ' s point . 
in his most recent report , he made consistent references to the need to support a viable fishery . 
he said : 
the management challenge for the Department of Fisheries and Oceans is to conserve existing stocks and rebuild those that are at low levels , while maintaining the viability of the fisheries . 
it will have to adapt its management regime to the new realities and gain the acceptance and support of stakeholders if it is to be successful . 
he also highlighted the need for : 
... resolving consultation problems to improve stakeholder relations and move toward forming partnerships to share management responsibilities and offset costs . 
that is what Dan Edwards is asking for . 
so far , the federal government ' s consistent response to requests from the communities for help has been that the $ 400 - million program announced last year to cope with the coho crisis will address this year ' s sockeye problem as well . 
since the EI system does not assist fishermen who have not been able to fish , native and non - native fishermen alike have no other recourse than welfare . 
this is a reality in communities where this year fishermen have invested , in some instances , tens of thousands of dollars in fishing gear and start - up costs for a fishery that never happened . 
Dan represents a coalition called the Fraser River Sockeye Crisis Committee . 
this involves the coastal communities that are starving for lack of assistance . 
Dan has lost 50 pounds since the beginning of the hunger strike . 
he is physically weak but spiritually resolute . 
senator Ray Perrault and I have urged Dan not to risk his life , but he is adamant that , until someone pays attention , he will not eat . 
surely , the federal government can sit down with the province and the stakeholders and work out a plan that will deliver emergency help to the people of B.C. ' s communities . 
the collapse of the Fraser River sockeye runs is a natural disaster . 
there are methods for dealing with natural disasters that effectively deliver assistance to those who are so profoundly affected by them . 
these were implemented in Ontario and Quebec after the ice storm . 
they were also put in place in New Brunswick in the fish farm virus outbreak of 1998 . 
my fear is that if anything happens to Dan Edwards , the situation in the communities , which is already desperate , will become volatile . 
we need a show of political will that will solve this problem for native and non - native communities before there is a human tragedy on the coast . 
m é decins du Monde 
hon. Marisa Ferretti Barth : 
honourable senators , I draw your attention to an initiative by the M é decins du Monde organization to provide medical care to young street people in Montreal . 
according to those who work with young street people , there are between 2,000 and 5,000 homeless young people in Montreal . 
these young people are not organized . 
often , they do not have health cards . 
from experience , they know they will not be well received when they show up at the emergency department . 
so they are in poor health . 
in January , M é decins du Monde set up a mobile team of doctors that will go to the young people where they are , that is , in the street . 
i will close with a comment made by Dr. R é jean Thomas , the man behind this magnificent project , who told a journalist that what the organization wanted to do was to go after the problems faced by the poorest in rich countries . 
this initiative should ease things for these young people , who live on the street and in misery . 
i invite all of you , honourable senators , to become aware of the problems of young street people in our society . 
in Montreal , at our seniors ' community centre near Radio - Canada on Ren é - L é vesque Boulevard , we will begin on December 26 the first of a series of days providing shelter and food , without regard to age , to all street people in the city of Montreal . 
this initiative will work well , and we will be able to provide meals all weekend . 
people will be there to help these people on Saturday and Sunday , because there is nothing for these folks who are left on their own . 
we thought that , starting December 26 , we would be able to help them each weekend for as long as we will be able to . 
international Day of Human Rights 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I rise today to note that December 10 is designated as International Day of Human Rights . 
as we close out the millennium , we can look back with some pride , both in Canada and in a world context , that the United Nations and others have been able to develop human rights instruments , covenants and other mechanisms , and , further , to raise public awareness that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights . 
however , it is regrettable that atrocities continue and that the most vulnerable in our society continue to be disproportionately in the category of those who lose their lives , dignity , safety and security . 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is yet to be adhered to in a way that would give us cause for celebration . 
it is important for all Canadians to reflect on what we have personally done to contribute to the furtherance of the cause of human rights and to rededicate ourselves to putting human rights at the top of our personal and public agendas . 
parliamentarians have a high responsibility to ensure that Canada ' s words and actions , both at home and abroad , adhere to the declarations , covenants and other instruments that Canada has signed . 
we must not lapse into ad hoc scrutiny and we must not let political or economic factors override our adherence to fundamental human rights values that we hold so dear in this society . 
as Parliamentarians , we must ensure that we do not fall into selective or random adherence of human rights and that we do not raise the issue of human rights only when prodded by interest groups or media attention . 
it should be nothing less than a constant and fundamental issue in all aspects of our work . 
therefore , we must dedicate ourselves to practices and procedures that will support a constant , continuous and even - handed application of human rights . 
i appeal again to the leadership in the Senate to immediately set up a human rights committee , as I placed by motion in this chamber at the last session . 
such a committee would go a long way to discharging our duties to the countless millions who have lost their lives or those who have lost other fundamental freedoms . 
fisheries and Oceans 
closure of Fraser River Sockeye Fishery - Program to Refund Salmon Licence Fees - Hunger Strike by Dan Edwards 
hon. Raymond J . Perrault : 
honourable senators , I have been in contact with the Minister of Fisheries today , and I have also spoken with Mr. Dan Edwards , who is on a hunger strike . 
i have some information to bring to the Senate . 
" based on unusual circumstances in the 1999 salmon fishing season , Fisheries and Oceans Canada will refund licence fees for those commercial fishermen who faced significant financial impact by the Fraser River sockeye closures this summer , " Minister Dhaliwal said . 
" i have asked my officials to do everything possible to have these cheques to the licence holders before Christmas . " 
" about two million dollars will be paid directly to approximately 1,600 licence holders or vessel owners of record , " said Mr. Dhaliwal . 
honourable senators , there is further information , but it would take too long to provide it to the Senate at this time . 
the government is acting to meet this particular challenge . 
Mr. Edwards is heartened by the fact that the minister may well be in direct contact with him this afternoon . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Position of the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I wish to share with you a letter addressed to the Honourable Tony Clement , Ontario ' s Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing . 
it reads as follows : 
dear Sir , 
i have learned through the media that your government decided not to give bilingual status to the new City of Ottawa , which will amalgamate 11 existing municipalities . 
the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne du Canada wrote you a letter on December 7 summing up the arguments as to why Ottawa should be bilingual . 
there is no need for us to repeat ourselves . 
i share the principles and sentiments expressed by the federation . 
as a francophone parliamentarian , it is very important for me to work in a city that respects and values my mother tongue . 
it is also essential that I be able to feel at home in my nation ' s capital . 
i hope that the notion that Ottawa would become a unilingual English city is simply a misunderstanding on the part of journalists . 
i ask for clarification . 
honourable senators , I urge you to support the principle expressed by the F é d é ration des communaut é s francophones et acadienne du Canada and the concept of respecting Canada ' s two official languages in the City of Ottawa . 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I rise today to comment on the language status of the Ottawa region . 
as a resident of Ottawa , as a senator from Ontario and as an anglophone , I am compelled to comment on the language issue of the amalgamated City of Ottawa , which will be born on January 1 , 2001 . 
as it stands right now , Ottawa is officially bilingual . 
our nation has two official languages and it is only natural that our country ' s capital should be bilingual , not only because there are francophones living in the region but because the region should reflect the character of the country as a whole . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Kenny : 
bilingualism is nothing new to the region of Ottawa . 
it is part of the history of this region and it should be guaranteed in the future of the region . 
coincidentally , the amalgamated city , along with the City of Hull , will co - host the World Francophone Games in 2001 . 
indeed , with Ottawa - Hull functioning as a gateway between the provinces , it is only natural that Ottawa ' s bilingual status should be recognized at the provincial level . 
Mr. Glen Shortliffe ' s report calls the region of Ottawa a unique tapestry and recommends that the new City of Ottawa be " legislatively designated a bilingual city with services to be provided in both official languages where warranted . " 
while the province has implemented most of Mr. Shortliffe ' s advice , they have chosen to ignore this proposal . 
the people of Ottawa and the people of Canada want assurances and should be given assurances that Ottawa will be officially bilingual once the merger goes through . 
as the first minister , Mr. Harris must recognize the importance of having Ottawa as a bilingual city . 
he must show leadership on this issue , make Ottawa bilingual and clear up any of the uncertainty . 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
reasons for Abstention DuringClause - by - Clause Study 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , later this day the Foreign Affairs Committee will present a report on Bill C - 4 , a bill to implement an international agreement for cooperation on the international space station . 
my reasons are set out in the evidence of the committee on December 7 , at page 10 . 
some Hon. Senators : 
senator Grafstein : 
please let me finish , and then honourable senators can object . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , this is a time for statements , not explanations on reports . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , since I will not be afforded an opportunity to speak at report stage , I thought I would use Senators ' Statements to indicate my reason for abstention . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I call your attention to some distinguished visitors in the gallery . 
they are hosted by the Honourable Senator Wilson . 
welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
as well , we have with us a delegation of 10 Russian specialists , who represent the federal and selected regional governments of Russia and are practitioners in various components of the mortgage financing business . 
they have just completed a three - week training period here in our Canadian system of mortgage financing . 
welcome to the Senate of Canada . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
business of the Senate 
a Senator ' s Guide to Disability Tabled 
hon. Brenda M. Robertson : 
honourable senators , I wish to table the small booklet , " A Senator ' s Guide to Disability , " and ask that the clerk distribute it to the desks of senators . 
( 1430 ) 
Quebec 
linguistic School Boards - Amendment to Section 93 of the Constitution - First Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 , I have the honour to table the report of the Special Joint Committee to amend Section 93 of the 1867 Constitution Act concerning the Quebec school system on the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Airline - Second Report Presented 
hon. Lise Bacon , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications has the honour to table its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized on October 14 , 1999 , to examine and report pursuant to subsection 47 ( 5 ) of the Canada Transportation Act , the order laid before this Chamber on September 14 , 1999 , authorizing certain major air carriers and persons to negotiate and enter into any conditional agreement , now tables its final report which is appended to this report . 
respectfully submitted , 
LISE BACON 
chairman 
( for text of report , see appendix to today ' s Journals of the Senate , p . 244 . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
senator Bacon : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 97 ( 3 ) , I move that the report be reports placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
on motion of Senator Bacon , the report was placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
report of Committee 
hon. Peter A . Stollery , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs has the honour to present its 
fifth REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill C - 4 , An Act to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated , Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Stollery , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
report of Foreign affairs Committee 
hon. Peter A . Stollery , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs has the honour to present its 
sixth REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill S - 3 , An Act to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated , Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , and now reports the same without amendment . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the third time ? 
on motion of Senator Stollery , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
second Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Bill Rompkey , Chairman of the Standing Committee on Internal , Economy , Budgets and Administration , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 9 , 1999 
the Standing Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration has the honour to table its 
second REPORT 
your Committee is presently undertaking a review of the budgetary situation pertaining to Senate Committees . 
your Committee therefore recommends that , notwithstanding the Procedural Guidelines for the Financial Operation of Senate Committees , for any committee budget for the financial year 1999 - 2000 submitted to and approved by the Internal Economy Committee , your Committee be authorized to release no more than 6 / 12 of those approved funds until February 10 , 2000 . 
the two exceptions to this recommendation are : i ) the budget submitted by the Transport and Communications Committee concerning its review of the order under section 47 ( 5 ) of the Canada Transportation Act , for the amount of $ 19,900 ; and ii ) the budget submitted by the Aboriginal Peoples Committee concerning its study on Aboriginal Self Governance , for the amount of $ 14,750 . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration . 
on motion of Senator Rompkey , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
scrutiny of Regulations 
first report of Joint Committee Presented 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the first report of the Standing Joint Committee for the Scrutiny of Regulations concerning its permanent reference and the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
( for text of report , see today ' s Journals of the Senate . ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration 
on motion of Senator Hervieux - Payette , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
child Custody and Access 
first Report of Special Joint Committee Tabled 
hon. Landon Pearson : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rule 104 , I have the honour to table the first report of the Special Joint Committee on Child Custody and Access , which deals with the expenses incurred by the committee during the First Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . 
foreign Affairs 
notice of Motion to Authorize Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Monday , December 13 , 1999 , I will move : 
that notwithstanding the Orders of the Senate adopted on Thursday October 14 , 1999 and on Wednesday November 17 , 1999 the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs which was authorized to examine and report upon the ramifications to Canada : 1 . of the changed mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) and Canada ' s role in NATO since the demise of the Warsaw Pact , the end of the Cold War and the recent addition to membership in NATO of Hungary , Poland and the Czech Republic ; and 2 . of peacekeeping , with particular reference to Canada ' s ability to participate in it under the auspices of any international body of which Canada is a member , be empowered to present its final report no later than March 10 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Adopt Recommendation to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Monday next , December 13 , 1999 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the decision of the Government of Ontario not to adopt a recommendation to declare the City of Ottawa bilingual following its proposed restructuration . 
the Senate 
notice of Motion to Uphold Royal Assent Proceedings 
leave having been given to revert to Notices of Motions : 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , pursuant to rules 56 ( 1 ) and 58 ( 1 ) ( i ) , I hereby give notice that , one day hence , I shall move : 
that the Senate of Canada affirm its Royal Assent procedure in the Senate described by parliamentary authorities Norman Wilding and Philip Laundy " The Canadian ceremony seems to be that which most closely resembles the original . " ; 
that the Senate uphold the sovereign right of Her Majesty , as enacted in the Constitution Act 1867 , in the Royal Prerogative of the Royal Assent in respect of parliamentary proceedings and bills considered , voted or passed in both Houses of Parliament ; 
that the Senate as the House of Her Majesty ' s Royal Assent affirm its ancient constitutional right as the House of the Parliament , the House for the proceedings of the three estates of Parliament acting together as the One Parliament of Canada ; 
that the Senate affirm the Law of Parliament , the " lex parliamenti " , that ancient law which holds that the Royal Consent is required for Parliament ' s consideration of any bill or any parliamentary proceeding altering Her Majesty ' s Royal Prerogative ; 
that the Senate affirm that the parliamentary procedure for a private member of Parliament to obtain the Royal Consent is a motion for an address to Her Majesty requesting the same , as distinct from the other forms for obtaining Royal Consent which may be available to the Prime Minister or ministers acting under political ministerial responsibility ; and 
that the Senate affirm the necessity of the Royal Consent as given by Her Majesty to the consideration of bills affecting the Royal Prerogative , as that Royal Consent which was given by Queen Elizabeth II to the 1967 Royal Assent Bill , which Consent was delivered in the United Kingdom House of Lords by the Lord Chancellor Lord Gardiner at the bill ' s second reading on March 2 , 1967 , stating : 
" my Lords , I have it in command from Her Majesty the Queen to acquaint the House that Her Majesty , having been informed of the purport of the Royal Assent Bill , has consented to place Her Prerogative and interest , so far as they are affected by the Bill , at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the Bill . " 
and weeks later , on April 17 , 1967 , in the United Kingdom House of Commons , delivered by the Attorney General Sir Elwyn Jones , stating : 
" i have it in Command from the Queen to acquaint the House that Her Majesty , having been informed of the purport of the Bill , has consented to place Her prerogative and interest , so far as they are affected by the Bill , at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the Bill . 
i beg to move , that the Bill be now read a Second time . " 
question PERIOD 
transport 
divestiture of Public Wharves - Assignment of Wharf on Thetis Island to Indian Band on Kuper Island 
hon. Pat Carney : 
honourable senators , my question is addressed to the Leader of the Government in the Senate , to whom I have given notice . 
on October 18 , I wrote to the Minister of Transport objecting to his department ' s decision to allocate a public wharf on Thetis Island on the B.C. coast to the nearby native community of Kuper Island , which has its own wharf . 
this move has caused Thetis Islanders great anxiety , since the wharf is their only access by water . 
the policy of the Department of Transport is to divest the public wharves to the local communities in which they are located . 
i have confirmed that this is still the policy . 
could the Leader of the Government in the Senate assist me in finding out whether it is the intent of the federal government to allocate public docks on one island to a native band on another island before any native land claims have been settled in this area ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for giving notice of this question earlier today . 
i was hoping also that she would help me with the pronunciation of the Indian band name . 
senator Carney : 
i can do that , honourable senators . 
it sounds like Penelope . 
it is Penelakut . 
senator Boudreau : 
i again thank the honourable senator . 
the information I have gleaned suggests that in May of this year the band indicated an interest in the particular facility of which she speaks and that discussions began between the band and the Department of Transport . 
subsequent to that , residents indicated some objection to the process , at least to the extent that they wanted to be involved . 
i understand that , as a result of those interventions , a meeting is now planned between the band and residents of the island , and as a result no negotiations with the Penelakut band have been completed . 
hopefully these discussions between the residents and the band will lead to a satisfactory solution for all . 
senator Carney : 
honourable senators , could the Leader of the Government in the Senate assist me in obtaining a reply to this letter of October 18 to the minister ? 
if the Department of Transport has changed the policy - a change they never announced - it will isolate small communities and paralyze economic activity because every island has only one wharf . 
if the department gives an island ' s wharf to the control of another island , the economic activity of that original island is paralyzed . 
it would be helpful to me if the Leader of the Government could get the Minister of Transport to answer my letter of October 18 . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I have no difficulty approaching the minister to request that the honourable senator ' s letter be answered . 
national Defence 
problems with Engines of Patrol Frigates 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I have a question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
four CPFs , Canadian patrol frigates , have been hit by generator blow - outs . 
about four or five years ago , we had a plague of similar problems , and we spent a large amount of money trying to track down the cause and to correct the problem . 
what is the government planning with respect to the four frigates that are out of service now ? 
while I am on my feet , are there any indications that this problem may occur in other frigates , and , if so , on the East Coast , the West Coast or on both ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I only have information on the four patrol frigates to which the honourable senator referred . 
the problems experienced by the Canadian patrol frigates are quite limited in nature , affecting the electrical generators and not the propulsion engine . 
however , a thorough technical investigation is ongoing . 
both temporary and longer - term measures are being implemented . 
one would hope that this type of failure would not recur since the equipment and the frigates generally perform well . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , it is questionable whether they have performed well or not . 
we have been the subject of much criticism from our allies in other parts of the world about the ability of frigates that cannot be sailed at top speed because of this very problem . 
we also know they perform very well minus 40 per cent of their capability : a safe , reliable , shipborne helicopter . 
given these two major problems , it is a little difficult to say , without tongue in cheek , that our frigates are performing well . 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Timing of Announcement 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , can the minister give us some indication as to whether , before we return in February , there will be an announcement with respect to the procurement program for the shipborne helicopter ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am not in a position to make any statement today with respect to the timing of any procurement announcements . 
it is a matter of top priority with the Minister of National Defence as well as for many in the Senate and in the other place . 
we all hope that such an announcement can be made in the near future . 
senator Forrestall : 
the near future is now 1,792 days old and counting . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if the Honourable Senator Forrestall wishes to stand up , we will listen to him . 
senator Forrestall : 
in other words , when we will get new helicopters ? 
senator Graham : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Boudreau : 
with respect to the question , the Armed Forces have initiated a number of major new programs over the period which he describes . 
as we wait for the procurement of the new on - board helicopters , we have made progress with other programs , including the procurement programs for the search and rescue helicopters , for submarines and for enhancing the living allowances and the circumstances of the forces themselves . 
i understand the honourable senator ' s impatience with the on - board helicopter program , but I am hopeful that his diligent efforts will be rewarded in the very near future . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill - Opposition from Government of Alberta 
hon. Douglas Roche : 
honourable senators , this question is directed to the chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology . 
as a result of yesterday ' s exchange here in the Senate on Alberta ' s letter to the chairman of December 7 , the Government of Alberta informed me today that it did not receive an invitation to appear before the committee on Bill C - 6 . 
to be fair to the chairman , do I not believe Alberta requested an invitation , but simply sent a letter . 
what we may be facing here is a failure of adequate communication , and not ill will . 
nonetheless , Alberta ' s concerns with interference in areas of provincial jurisdiction remain . 
will the chairman undertake to address Alberta ' s concerns , as expressed in the letter , when he speaks in the Senate today on the bill ? 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , in reply to the question of Senator Roche , I will make two observations . 
first , as I indicated yesterday , I thought that the Government of Alberta had been invited to appear , although I was very careful to say - and I just read Hansard - that I would confirm that with the clerk of the committee . 
in fact , the Government of Alberta , in contrast to the Government of Ontario , did not ask to appear before the committee . 
they did submit a brief to us - and , another one was received two days ago - but they did not ask to appear . 
it may have been an oversight on the part of the committee not to invite them , but they certainly would have been welcomed as witnesses had they asked to appear . 
indeed , any committee I have ever chaired has always welcomed representations from provincial governments . 
the second issue is the constitutional issue . 
i will not deal with that in my comments today . 
i will stand by the comments I made yesterday , which is simply that the committee had expert testimony which satisfied all members of the committee that the proposed bill is constitutional . 
therefore , that issue was not dealt with in our report because we believe the bill is constitutional and the evidence before the committee strongly supports that conclusion . 
environment 
Alberta - Announcement to Process Imported Hazardous Waste at Swan Hills Treatment Centre - Government Policy 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , the Government of Alberta has announced a change in policy affecting the Swan Hills Treatment Centre . 
the change in policy allows the Swan Hills Treatment Centre to import and treat raw waste , including PCBs and other contaminants , without environmental assessment . 
honourable senators , the company which manages the treatment centre does not have an unblemished record . 
it has a record of leaks , explosions and pollution convictions . 
it failed to report a major release of dioxins and furans several years ago - a release which caused health problems for people downstream and contaminated fish and wildlife . 
it was fined $ 625,000 for so doing . 
the United States has a ban on the importation of foreign generated wastes . 
of course , this change in policy of the Government of Alberta does not just affect Alberta since these particular wastes may come in through other provinces , other ports and be trucked to Alberta , thus raising safety and health issues for Canadians along those routes . 
in light of this announcement , does the Government of Canada see any need to change its stance on the importation of wastes generally ? 
will the Leader of the Government inquire as to whether the Minister of the Environment is requesting a federal environmental assessment ? 
they have the right to demand that assessment because this involves more than just the Province of Alberta . 
of course , the province itself is not planning such an assessment . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the decision to treat hazardous wastes in the Swan Hills facility is a decision presently within the jurisdiction of the Government of Alberta . 
while the decision to import or export hazardous materials must meet the federal standards of the hazardous waste regulations , it is still within the jurisdiction of the Province of Alberta . 
in fact , other provinces and other jurisdictions presently import foreign - produced wastes . 
i do not know specifically the position of the Minister of the Environment with respect to the environmental assessment as raised by the Honourable Senator Spivak . 
however , I will direct an inquiry to the minister and respond next week . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , is the Leader of the Government in the Senate stating that it is within the jurisdiction of the provinces to import this waste and that the issue of trucking and conveying hazardous wastes through other provinces is also under provincial jurisdiction ? 
i am not sure I understood the leader ' s response . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the export and import of hazardous waste regulations are within federal jurisdiction and federal responsibility . 
those regulations will be enforced in this situation , should they go forward with the importation . 
the amendment of the operating licence of the facility to accommodate wastes from a foreign country is within the jurisdiction of the province , as I understand it . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , boundaries between provinces are under the export and import regulations . 
it is the trucking of waste across boundaries that interests me . 
is the leader saying that is not a provincial responsibility but comes under federal jurisdiction ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , to import or export any such wastes , facilities must meet the Government of Canada ' s requirements under the hazardous wastes regulations . 
these regulations provide health and safety standards for the treatment of that waste . 
the treatment in the facility itself is authorized through the operating licence granted by the province to the facility . 
a number of provinces operate facilities which import hazardous wastes into their jurisdictions . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , is the Government of Canada not concerned that we might become the repository of hazardous wastes from around the world ? 
these are serious chemicals which contain dioxins and furans . 
under the recently passed legislation , we are trying to have these chemicals banned , not import them . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , no doubt the Government of Canada would be concerned with a scenario where we became the repository of the world ' s hazardous wastes . 
the opinion of the minister at this point is that the existing regulations will enable us to deal appropriately with this particular situation . 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Response by Government 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate and deals with the critical situation and the crisis faced by farmers . 
the World Trade Organization meetings in Seattle did not turn out positively . 
the Minister of Agriculture , Lyle Vanclief , held out little hope that Canadian grain farmers will soon see relief from international subsidies . 
i came to the same conclusion after talking to people from Europe , the United States and other countries . 
the standing committee in the House of Commons has been meeting out West . 
i attended the meetings in Estevan and Regina . 
in fact , I was asked by the Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture to help with their presentation to the committee . 
the farmers , who are hurting severely , are asking , in a very emotional way , if anyone is listening . 
i know the House of Commons committee is out there listening , and they listened very well . 
i was proud of them as Members of Parliament because they heard , and it seemed that they understood . 
does the leader believe , as a member of the cabinet , that the cabinet is listening to the voices of farmers and to their cries as they face this crisis ? 
it has been publicized all over Canada that Mr. Milne , one of the members of the House of Commons , will be holding a benefit for the farmers in Toronto . 
it cannot be that people do not understand the crisis that these farmers are facing . 
is cabinet listening ? 
is the minister willing to carry the message from this corner ? 
speeches on this issue from his side of the house have been just as strong as those from this side . 
is anyone listening ? 
senator Ghitter : 
no , they are not listening . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the level of concern expressed in the debate initiated by Honourable Senator Gustafson has already been conveyed to the Minister of Agriculture . 
the work of the House of Commons committee will be taken into serious account . 
as the honourable senator said , they have been very diligent about their duties , and any resulting report will obviously be taken very seriously by the minister and his cabinet colleagues . 
hopefully , this report will be forthcoming in a reasonably short period of time . 
senator Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I have before me a news release indicating that the farm crisis program is an absolute failure and that Ontario and Saskatchewan are pulling out . 
we are only a few days away from moving into the next millennium , the next generation , and the next century . 
we have been hearing about and discussing this situation for one - and - one - half years . 
nothing has come forward yet that has been workable . 
i cannot emphasize enough the seriousness of the situation . 
it is important that the Prime Minister , the Minister of Agriculture and cabinet listen . 
i can say positively that the Senate has listened . 
i believe that the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry certainly responded positively . 
the question is whether the government will respond . 
this is most important . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator refers to two provinces which have indicated their unhappiness with the existing safety net programs , but the reasons for their unhappiness differed quite significantly . 
the Province of Ontario believes that not enough of the safety net was provided to their particular area , and , by extension , one would conclude that they believe that too much of the safety net has been extended elsewhere . 
the federal and provincial agricultural ministers have just concluded a meeting in Toronto . 
that issue was on the table , and I believe that is where some of those statements arose . 
the minister agreed that the process should be ongoing and not end with the termination of the conference . 
i believe that the Commons agriculture committee , report will indeed have something positive and substantial to contribute to the ongoing discussion between the federal government and the provinces . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to questions raised in the Senate on November 24 , 1999 by Senator Tkachuk and Senator Stratton regarding the cost of the gun registration program and a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 25 , 1999 by Senator Forrestall regarding the replacement of the Sea King helicopter fleet and his request for a copy of the statement of requirements . 
justice 
cost of Gun Registration Program - Responsibility of Minister 
( response to questions raised by Hon. David Tkachuk and Hon. Terry Stratton on November 24 , 1999 ) 
the figure of $ 85 million is not the only figure Minister Rock estimated . 
it is a partial extraction of information presented by Minister Rock in April of 1995 to a House of Commons Committee . 
that documentation estimated the cost of firearms control for 5 years to be $ 184 million . 
the $ 85 million would be required to set up the system . 
the balance of the estimate included running the former system ( C - 17 ) and operating the new system . 
as the legislation passed through Parliament in 1994 , new features were added including spousal notification and more astringent background checks for license applicant . 
subsequent to the legislation passing the House but prior to completing the building and implementation of the system , the provinces of Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba together with the Northwest Territories and the Yukon announced that they would not administer the program in their jurisdictions . 
all of these events added to the cost of setting up and implementing the system . 
the Minister of Justice has been saying since 1998 that the original $ 85 million for building and implementing the system had increased to $ 120 million . 
with the implementation of the new system December 1 , 1998 , our obligations to run the old system were largely terminated , as were the initial construction and implementation costs . 
in the end , we expect the average costs of administration of the Firearms Act to be comparable to other national administrative system such as Passport Office and the Intellectual Property Registry . 
we are in the final stages of negotiation with provinces respecting the Service Delivery Model that will govern federal payments to jurisdictions for their administrative costs . 
that we have had problems with respect to our implementation is a matter of public record . 
we commissioned a study by a major consulting firm to assist us to identify the reasons for our processing difficulties and potential solutions . 
they reported in June of this year indicating that there were problems concerning high rates of error on applications sent for processing by the new system , system capacity , and productivity errors arising from our business practices . 
the report noted that the type of problems we are experiencing are normal for an undertaking of this size at this stage of implementation . 
we have developed an action plan for dealing with these difficulties . 
the money approved to run this program is provided within the context of the Effective Project Approval ( EPA ) decision rendered by Treasury Board , consistent with their Major Crown Project policy . 
for every fiscal year between 1995 / 1996 and 1998 / 1999 , this program has operated within the budget envelope described in the EPA . 
dealing with the start - up problems noted above will add a significant challenge to administration of the program for the fiscal year 1999 / 2000 . 
the Minister of Justice and the Canadian Firearms Centre are committed to operating this program successfully within the limit approved by Treasury Board . 
no distribution of monies to the program can be made without Board concurrence . 
all parties are committed to delivering an effective program within those constraints . 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet - Request for Copy of Statement of Requirements 
( response to question raised by Hon. J . Michael Forrestall on November 25 , 1999 ) 
as the Minister has said on numerous occasions , the Sea King helicopters need to be replaced . 
in fact , the Minister confirmed that the Maritime Helicopter Project is his number one equipment priority and that a procurement strategy is being developed . 
the Statement of Requirements will not be tabled in this Chamber at this time . 
as the Minister has previously indicated , in addition to the Statement of Requirements , a number of issues regarding the procurement strategy of the MHP must also be carefully examined , and other Government Departments have to be consulted . 
the Government will make an announcement when these issues have been addressed . 
visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I call the Orders of the Day , I draw your attention to a distinguished visitor in the gallery . 
it is Mr. Blair Morin , who is a leader and councillor of the Enoch Cree Nation . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I wish you welcome to the Senate . 
orders OF THE DAY 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
third Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Bryden , for the third reading of Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , as amended , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Murray , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Doody , that the Bill be not now read a third time but that it be amended in clause 7 , on page 7 : 
( a ) by deleting lines 16 to 22 ; and 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak to the amendment to the bill which was moved yesterday by Senator Murray in his most entertaining address . 
there is no question that his Cape Breton background certainly comes to the fore when he launches a speech in this house . 
i would not attempt by any means to match his performance but rather will deal with the substance of what he said . 
that is clearly easier . 
he asked why our privacy rights should be extinguished 20 years after we are in the grave . 
as Senator Murray pointed out yesterday , for a number of people , particularly people in public life like him , this is a matter of some concern . 
having known Senator Murray for some time , I understand why he might be uneasy about that . 
when this matter was raised in committee , the government members of the committee felt strongly that it would be a mistake for the committee to adopt this amendment . 
we felt it would be a mistake to adopt the amendment in light of the fact that we had heard relatively little evidence on it . 
this is in contrast to the amendment in relation to the health care sector that was adopted at report stage on Tuesday . 
on that amendment , we heard from a significant number of witnesses . 
we had many hours of testimony from a wide cross - section of witnesses . 
as I indicated yesterday , on the health care issue , the committee was of unanimous agreement that the amendment ought to be passed . 
we are delighted that this chamber adopted the amendment yesterday . 
the issue Senator Murray raised yesterday is that a certain provision in Bill C - 6 has the effect of removing the privacy protection contained in that bill 20 years after an individual dies . 
in the limited evidence we heard on that subject , we heard that the so - called 20 - year rule exists in other legislation , notably the Privacy Act and the National Archives of Canada Act . 
we also heard that it is not as if , under this bill , any request for information will automatically be honoured some 20 years after a person ' s death . 
as Industry Canada officials pointed out in their testimony before the committee , this bill does not completely extinguish privacy rights of the deceased 20 years after their death . 
it allows disclosure only for purposes for which the data was originally collected and only for purposes for which the individual would have had to give consent for its collection in the first place . 
we also heard from a privacy expert , Mr. Ian Lawson , who argued - it was a unique argument that neither Senator Murray nor I had heard before - that there is a legal principle that one ' s rights should not be enforceable after one has died . 
in effect , Mr. Lawson ' s argument was interesting . 
he based it on the logic that one cannot give consent after one has passed away . 
that seemed to be a practical issue , except , as Senator Murray and I both pointed out to him , that this is where heirs and family members clearly become an issue . 
neither Senator Murray nor I gave much weight to Mr. Lawson ' s testimony . 
another expert witness on privacy , Valerie Steeves , made an interesting observation . 
although she had testified on this bill before the House of Commons , was testifying before us and had been involved with this bill for a long time , until Senator Murray raised his question with her last week , that issue had never crossed her mind . 
she had never been asked a question about it . 
it had never been raised by any of the people with whom she consults . 
therefore , honourable senators , this is not an issue on which any of the witnesses before the committee had any knowledge or had thought about . 
it is a provision that is in other acts , including the Privacy Act . 
honourable senators , it seemed to me and to the majority members of the committee that in conjunction with the work that I spoke about yesterday concerning the need for the government to undertake a substantial revision of the Privacy Act to bring government into line with the provisions Bill C - 6 imposes on the private sector , part of that study should clearly include a study of the so - called 20 - year rule and that it should be done in depth and quickly . 
it was our view that simply changing Bill C - 6 and ignoring various other federal acts would create a double standard of protection between the private sector and government , one that has been created already , in part , by the differences between Bill C - 6 and the Privacy Act . 
those of us on the majority side of the committee preferred to deal with that issue at one time . 
in other words , changes to the Privacy Act and the National Archives of Canada Act should be done at the same time . 
honourable senators , that is the main comment I have to make to Senator Murray . 
i agree with him in terms of the issue he raised and in terms of its substance . 
it is my view and the view of the majority members of the committee that this is a timing issue . 
it should be dealt with when we deal with the changes to the Privacy Act that will be coming down the road . 
therefore , honourable senators , my view is that this is not the appropriate time to proceed with this amendment , even though the spirit and intent of it are not things with which I have difficulty . 
my great difficulty is with its timing . 
i hope we look at this issue again , when presumably the Privacy Act , under pressure from this committee , comes back before the committee within the next few months . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if no other honourable senator wishes to speak , the question is on motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Murray . 
will those honourable senators in favour of the motion in amendment please say " yea " ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
yea . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
will those honourable senators opposed to the motion in amendment please say " nay " ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
nay . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
in my opinion , the " nays " have it . 
and two honourable senators having risen : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i have been informed by the whips that there is agreement on a 30 - minute bell . 
is there leave from honourable senators for a 30 - minute bell ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
motion in amendment negatived on the following division : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
7 th day of resuming debate ) 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , I listened carefully to the Speech from the Throne . 
i am a third generation farmer , whose grandchildren are fifth generation farmers . 
my grandfather came from Sweden to farm in Canada in 1905 , and he became a very proud Canadian . 
in speaking about this situation , I must say that we farmers are proud people . 
however , during the last few days I have seen men weep , I have seen them break down , and I have heard them say that it is demoralizing to need to get up and complain and talk about this situation . 
the women , on the other hand , are much better at being very blunt about the situation that they and their families are facing because of hardship . 
i know that honourable senators on the other side have heard , as I have in committee , about their problems and their serious situations . 
i see the Honourable Senator Joyce Fairbairn , who is the deputy chair of the Agriculture Committee , nodding her head . 
we heard again this morning from the soft wheat growers in Alberta and the problems they are having . 
i take no joy in delivering these words today . 
this government , the Senate and the House of Commons , the Prime Minister of Canada and the people of Canada , cannot ignore the serious crisis situation facing the agricultural community because it is a very serious national problem for the whole country . 
it not only affects Saskatchewan , Manitoba and Alberta , but the country as a whole . 
are all farmers doing badly ? 
No. I wish to be very clear and honest about that . 
dairy and chicken producers , and some other areas , are doing quite well and we do not wish to take their success from them . 
we , as grain farmers , need their support . 
therefore , they are doing quite well in the cattle industry . 
the grain producers are hurting quite severely because of low commodity prices . 
i have never seen them so low . 
i recently delivered a B - train of wheat to the Weyburn terminal from my farm . 
it was not a good grade of wheat . 
it had frozen due to the fact that we seeded late because of the wet conditions . 
the total return for that load of grain was $ 3,600 gross . 
the cheque for that B - train of wheat was $ 1,400 . 
i told him that he would get a bill . 
we hear stories of this kind of thing happening . 
the price of grain has been very low . 
flax dropped approximately 40 cents again yesterday . 
Saskatchewan is not quite as bad , where the average income is the lowest it has been since 1933 . 
those are the numbers we are getting from the agricultural departments . 
we are facing a serious problem . 
because of the actions of government we not only have low commodity prices , but we face some other very serious problems , especially in freight rates . 
again and again , farmers have stated that one - third of their income from delivering grain goes to freight the grain out of the country because we are landlocked . 
we heard this morning from the soft wheat growers in Alberta , who laid out important issues regarding the cost of freighting their grain . 
i suppose some of those changes needed to come . 
the grain elevator at Macoun was bulldozed . 
i was down to Seattle and during that time I ran into my grandson . 
he asked how I could have let that happen . 
that becomes an emotional thing , because in the Prairies people are used to seeing an elevator every nine miles , and they are part of the landscape . 
with some of these issues change was needed . 
i realize that . 
however , those changes could have come quite differently . 
i do not wish to politicize this matter , but I must raise some of the programs that were there as safety nets for farmers when there was a Conservative government . 
there was the GRIP program , which was a positive program for us . 
i believe it was Senator Hays who said to me time and again in the committee that we should be getting on with the work of fixing up these safety net programs . 
it was not a perfect program , but we need some long - term programs to go ahead . 
perhaps we are all to blame to some extent . 
we had some pretty good years when we did not pay that much attention and , of course , the most important thing then was that the deficit situation be brought under control . 
i think we all agree that the deficit was getting out of hand . 
on the other hand , there are certain things we failed to do in agriculture which , if they had been done , would have kept us from the serious situation in which we now find ourselves . 
honourable senators , that brings me to the AIDA program . 
the government has put money into this program , but it is not working . 
we have heard time and again that it is not working . 
i can name farmers who have received some money , but they are the wrong people . 
the program needs a serious overhauling . 
i think it is agreed that that must be done . 
in my opinion , what would have worked - and this the opinion was expressed by farmers in Regina and Estevan during the meetings I attended - is a direct injection of capital . 
it could have taken the form of an acreage payment . 
how serious are those needs ? 
there are crisis situations , which leads to social problems . 
some of the stories are too drastic to tell . 
they have been told at meetings where people have broken down and wept over their situations . 
some say there have been up to 15 suicides directly related to this situation . 
there is a lot of pride in being a farmer . 
his grandparents , along with a milk cow , made their way through Russia . 
the grandmother milked cows until she was 82 years of age . 
she never let them forget that that first milk cow saved her two boys and helped them get to Canada . 
the government has to make some serious decisions , and I believe that it will do the right thing . 
i give them that much credit , after having heard all that has been said and after considering all that is being done to make the media and the government aware of the situation . 
the standing committee of the other place was most receptive when it heard testimony on this matter . 
i was asked by the Minister of Agriculture of Saskatchewan to help him make their presentation to the standing committee . 
they listened well . 
they will bring back a report that will say many of the things that I am saying here today . 
i hope that the response will be a positive one for our farmers . 
social issues relate not only to the family and to the farm , but to the community . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
the Honourable Senator Gustafson ' s speaking time has elapsed . 
is the honourable senator asking for leave to continue ? 
senator Gustafson : 
yes , I am . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Gustafson : 
i wish to say a few words about the impact of this situation on communities and the impact of any positive measures taken by the government . 
these people create jobs . 
they recondition tractors , trucks and machinery . 
the whole community benefits as a result of their work . 
if $ 1 is spent on agriculture , it multiplies seven times , which is a whole other subject . 
i do not have time to get into the importance of that subject . 
agriculture is the third largest economy builder in Canada . 
there are great returns to the treasuries of Canada from agriculture . 
we cannot afford to let the industry down . 
every member of the Senate has a responsibility , not only at the national level but in the areas they represent , to ensure that our government takes positive steps to help our farmers in agriculture in both the short term and the long term . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator LeBreton , debate adjourned . 
medical Decisions Facilitation Bill 
second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Carstairs , seconded by the Honourable Senator P é pin , for the second reading of Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . - ( 
honourable Senator Lavoie - Roux ) 
hon. Ione Christensen : 
honourable senators , I rise to give support to Bill S - 2 , to facilitate the making of legitimate medical decisions regarding life - sustaining treatments and the controlling of pain . 
for the last 15 years , I was privileged to be the principal caregiver for , first , my parents and then a very old friend and teacher who had no family and required daily care . 
as each of these three persons reached the stage where palliative care and pain control was needed , I was the person trusted to ensure that their wishes were carried out . 
in all three cases , we first had extensive discussions of what their wishes were regarding life - sustaining treatment and pain control , and we then discussed that matter with their doctors and ensured that their wishes were noted on their charts . 
with all these persons in their last days , pain control and the starting of artificial hydration and nutrition treatments became an issue , and I was called upon to reaffirm their wishes as they were no longer able to do so themselves . 
in two cases , I did have enduring power of attorney , but , with all three , I knew what they wanted and was able to follow through on their wishes . 
what would have happened if I had not been there ? 
i found that the doctors and the professional caregivers hesitated to withhold treatment that would sustain life . 
they were in a grey area , and it is just that grey area which this bill addresses . 
national guidelines , the promotion of public awareness and , most of all , professional training in palliative care are very badly needed . 
as we move into the new millennium , a large proportion of our population will require such care , and we must be prepared to meet that need . 
i thank Senator Carstairs and other senators who have been instrumental in promoting this issue . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , this item will again stand in the name of Senator Lavoie - Roux . 
library of Parliament 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the first report of the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament ( mandate of committee ) , presented in the Senate on December 8 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . ( L ' Acadie - Acadia ) ) 
hon. Louis J . Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of this report . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
official Languages 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the first report of the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages ( quorum ) , presented in the Senate on December 8 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Losier - Cool ) 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of the report . 
hon. Serge Joyal ( The Hon. the Acting Speaker ) : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
review of Anti - Drug Policy 
motion to Form Special Senate Committee - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Nolin , seconded by the Honourable Senator Cohen : 
that a Special Committee of the Senate be appointed to reassess Canada ' s anti - drug legislation and policies , to carry out a broad consultation of the Canadian public to determine the specific needs of various regions of the country , where social problems associated with the trafficking and use of illegal drugs are more in evidence , to develop proposals to disseminate information about Canada ' s anti - drug policy and , finally , to make recommendations for an anti - drug strategy developed by and for Canadians under which all levels of government to work closely together to reduce the harm associated with the use of illegal drugs ; 
that , without being limited in its mandate by the following , the Committee be authorized to : 
- review the federal government ' s policy on illegal drugs in Canada , its effectiveness , and the extent to which it is fairly enforced ; 
- develop a national harm reduction policy in order to lessen the negative impact of illegal drugs in Canada , and make recommendations regarding the enforcement of this policy , specifically the possibility of focusing on use and abuse of drugs as a social and health problem ; 
- study harm reduction models adopted by other countries and determine if there is a need to implement them wholly or partially in Canada ; 
- examine Canada ' s international role and obligations under United Nations conventions on narcotics and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other related treaties in order to determine whether these treaties authorize it to take action other than laying criminal charges and imposing sentences at the international level ; 
- explore the effects of cannabis on health and examine whether alternative policy on cannabis would lead to increased harm in the short and long term . 
- examine the possibility of the government using its regulatory power under the Contraventions Act as an additional means of implementing a harm reduction policy , as is done in other jurisdictions ; 
- examine any other issue respecting Canada ' s anti - drug policy that the Committee considers appropriate to the completion of its mandate . 
that the Special Committee be composed of five Senators and that three members constitute a quorum ; 
that the Committee have the power to send for persons , papers and records , to examine witnesses , to report from time to time and to print such papers , briefs and evidence from day to day as may be ordered by the Committee ; 
that the briefs received and testimony heard during consideration of Bill C - 8 , An Act respecting the control of certain drugs , their precursors and other substances , by the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs during the Second Session of the Thirty - fifth Parliament be referred to the Committee ; 
that the Committee have the power to authorize television , radio and electronic broadcasting , as it deems appropriate , of any or all of its proceedings ; 
that the Committee be granted leave to sit when the Senate has been adjourned pursuant to subsection 95 ( 2 ) of the Rules of the Senate ; and 
that the Committee submit its final report not later than three years from the date of its being constituted . - ( 
honourable Senator Kenny ) 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
honourable senators , I rise today pursuant to the Honourable Senator Nolin ' s motion to form a special committee of the Senate to reassess Canada ' s anti - drug legislation and policies . 
the time has come to re - examine our current strategies to address the problems of drug use . 
honourable senators , it is apparent to all of us that there has been a change in the attitudes of Canadians toward drug - control policies and their results . 
there is greater recognition among Canadians that current policies are not producing the desired results . 
significant sums of money are being invested in policing drug use while related health and social problems continue and expand . 
creating a special committee with the proposed broad mandate would be an ideal forum to consult with members of the public . 
this process would help determine the specific needs of various regions . 
legal and medical experts would recommend an anti - drug strategy that takes into account legal matters , health problems and financial questions . 
honourable senators , this is a pressing issue . 
already , more than a year has passed since Dr. Diane Riley put forth her report in November of 1998 on drugs and drug policy in Canada , prepared for Senator Nolin . 
the time has now come for us to evaluate the views and values of Canadians , and to take into account the costs and benefits of current policies . 
information on alternative drug approaches and models adopted by other countries would help determine what policies to develop in Canada . 
legal issues , health problems and financial concerns relating to drug use are increasing and becoming more complex daily . 
because the issue is a sensitive one , governments too frequently step aside on the issue . 
it is not in Canada ' s or Canadians ' interests to do this any longer . 
the first recommendation of Dr. Riley ' s report was that there be an inquiry into drug policy in Canada and its relationship to domestic and international law , including human rights standards . 
she also said that this inquiry should examine drug policies and programs in other countries . 
since that report was tabled , no such inquiry has taken place . 
senator Nolin has done us all a service by reminding us that there are important issues surrounding drug use that need to be addressed . 
there is a need for dependable information on drug use in Canada . 
because a special committee of the Senate would have the power to examine witnesses , send for papers and records , and hear briefs and evidence , the final report would be a reliable source of objective information . 
a special committee would provide the necessary perspective , analysis and reflection required to develop potential solutions to the problems surrounding drug - use and drug - control policies in Canada . 
needless to say , there is great interest on the government ' s part in the outcome of such a study , and it is a great opportunity for the Senate to show leadership on a very important issue . 
honourable senators , I am urging you to support Senator Nolin ' s motion to create a special committee for the purpose of studying illegal drug use in Canada . 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Bill 
motion to Instruct Social Affairs , Science and Technology Committee to Divide Bill into Two Bills - Order Withdrawn 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Murray , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin : 
that it be an instruction to the Standing Senate Committee to which Bill C - 6 will be referred : 
that they have the power to divide Bill C - 6 , to support and promote electronic commerce by protecting personal information that is collected , used or disclosed in certain circumstances , by providing for the use of electronic means to communicate or record information or transactions and by amending the Canada Evidence Act , the Statutory Instruments Act and the Statute Revision Act , into two Bills ; the first consisting of Part 1 and Schedule 1 with Titles and a coming into force clause and the second consisting of the remainder of the Bill and Schedules 2 and 3 with Titles ; that any proceedings on the second Bill may stand postponed until after the consideration of the first Bill ; that either Bill may be reported to the Senate as soon as it has been considered ; and that , notwithstanding the usual practice , the Senate give this instruction at any time while the Bill is before the Senate , even after committee consideration of the Bill has commenced . - ( 
honourable Senator Kirby ) 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I cannot see how Order No. 22 can continue to stand . 
the bill has been disposed of and a message has been sent to the other place . 
we are not seized of Bill C - 6 . 
it must be struck from the Order Paper . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , to withdraw this motion from the Order Paper ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order withdrawn . 
religious Freedom in China in Relation to United Nations International Covenants 
inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Wilson calling the attention of the Senate to religious freedom in China , in relation to the UN international covenants . - ( 
honourable Senator Di Nino ) 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , in honour of Human Rights Day tomorrow , I should like to participate in this inquiry . 
i am pleased to rise to participate in the inquiry initiated by our colleague Senator Wilson , on religious freedom in China . 
as well , I should like to take this opportunity to comment on some remarks made by Senator Austin , both on this subject and on the contiguous issue of human rights in China . 
her Chinese hosts must have been very inspirational . 
i was somewhat mystified , however , by her remarks concerning the spiritual group Falun Gong , of which I will have more to say in a moment . 
senator Wilson said her " religious partners " - by that I gather she means the established churches - view the Falun Gong as a destabilizing and harmful , foreign - influence organization . 
i am not sure on what facts , if any , they based this rather bold assertion . 
i have certainly seen nothing that would lead me to a similar conclusion . 
as Senator Wilson is no doubt aware , the Chinese constitution guarantees freedom of belief . 
so why do her religious partners and , by extension , I presume , herself as well , single out the Falun Gong ? 
is it because it is not one of China ' s five official religions ? 
if so , I am disappointed . 
i would have thought that a person of Senator Wilson ' s stature in the religious community and her obvious experience would hold more tolerant opinions . 
in passing , I read this morning that there are a reported 30 million Chinese Christians who are subject to arrest , beatings and jail by Chinese authorities . 
apparently , they do not attend officially sanctioned places of worship . 
i would be interested to know if Senator Wilson or her partners raised this issue with their hosts during their visit to China . 
honourable senators , before we rose for the summer break , Senator Austin took me to task over some remarks I made concerning human rights in China . 
the gist of his remarks was that I am too confrontational , that we should be more accommodating to the Chinese . 
in other words , we should overlook some of the abuses occurring there . 
i , obviously , cannot and do not agree . 
it is a nice picture , but it is not totally true . 
honourable senators , our relationship with China is based on three major components . 
the first is immigration . 
i was first introduced to China and the Chinese in the late 1950 s , when I was a young banker in Chinatown in Toronto . 
over the years , I have kept in touch with various members of the Chinese community , and I can say without reservation that their presence has been a boon to our country . 
Chinese Canadians have made an immense contribution to Canada . 
they have worked hard and they have been honest and loyal citizens . 
they have broadened and enriched our culture . 
canada has clearly been the big winner as far as Chinese immigration is concerned . 
however , the same , in my opinion , cannot be said of the second component in our relationship with China , which is business and trade . 
in the years leading up to 1993 , this relationship was relatively stable . 
the trade numbers were about equal . 
i think they were somewhere in the range of $ 2.5 billion each way annually . 
all this changed when this present government came to office . 
since 1993 , Canadian taxpayers have been forced to subsidize , for unknown millions of dollars , attempts by Mr. Chr é tien and his colleagues to increase Canada ' s opportunities and presence in China . 
the results have been dismal , to say the least . 
in fact , since that time , Canada ' s exports to China have steadily declined in dollar value while imports have more than doubled . 
as a matter of fact , I think it is closer to being triple . 
the third component of our relationship with China deals with the role Canada has traditionally played as a proponent of human rights . 
one upon a time , honourable senators , Canadian governments promoted values and ideals that were the envy of the world . 
unfortunately , as we all know , when it comes to China this is not the case . 
today , we are just another set of businessmen seeking contracts . 
we have abandoned any pretence that there should be a link between human rights and trade . 
prime Minister Chr é tien says that we are too small to influence China . 
Mr. Chr é tien tells us that he is great pals with the Chinese leadership . 
why does he not act on this friendship ? 
our best friends in the world are the citizens of the United States of America . 
we are not too small to criticize them . 
we do it all the time . 
why can we not do the same with China ? 
why this special treatment of the Chinese government ? 
why is the Chinese government so committed to forcefully keeping Chinese citizens within the country ' s borders ? 
honourable senators , this past summer , few short weeks after Senator Austin assured this chamber that China had changed for the better , the Chinese government arrested more than 30,000 of its citizens . 
since then , it has continued to arrest more . 
their crime ? 
according to the Chinese government - and , I presume , Senator Wilson ' s religious partners as well - it was belonging to the Falun Gong spiritual movement I mentioned a minute ago . 
in addition to arresting all these people , the government ordered more than 1.5 million cassettes , pamphlets , and so on , related to the movement confiscated or destroyed . 
there were even public book burnings . 
honourable senators , somehow it is hard to imagine book burnings at the dawn of the third millennium . 
the inquisition burned books ; so did the Nazis . 
now , it seems , the Communist Chinese have added their name to this short yet infamous list - and Senator Austin calls this progress . 
honourable senators , my aim in talking about the issue of human rights is not to demonize the Chinese . 
i truly believe that the Chinese people , those who know , are also appalled by what is happening in their country . 
my criticism is directed at the Chinese government , not the people of China . 
the Prime Minister says Canada cannot make a difference . 
why , then , is his government telling the world it thinks human rights are important ? 
it is one of the fundamental objectives . 
are not human rights part of Canada ' s values ? 
obviously the answer is " yes " . 
the note also referred to a document entitled " Canada in the World . " 
according to this document , Canada can make an important contribution to international security by promoting Canadian values , including respect for human rights , democracy , and the rule of law . 
why are we not doing this with China ? 
why are we not promoting our values in our relations with them ? 
all we seem to hear about are high - level , behind - closed - door meetings , plurilateral symposia , cooperative initiatives , and dialogue projects . 
if the government believes religious freedom and human rights are fundamental pillars of its foreign policy , it should say so to the world , without exception . 
it should show by its actions that it has the courage of its convictions . 
why is the Prime Minister not standing up on the world stage and criticizing the foreign occupation of Tibet or the religious persecution the Falun Gong in China ? 
is the lure of trade that strong , or are the supposed bonds of his friendship with the Chinese leadership that weak ? 
senator Wilson tells us her religious partners in China believe the Falun Gong are a threat to stability in China . 
it is funny how that works . 
the Buddhists are not , the Catholic and Protestants are not , and neither apparently are the believers in the Prophet or those who follow the teachings of Taoism . 
it is just the members of the unofficial Falun Gong . 
honourable senators , on Monday of this week , the American president , Mr. Clinton , unlike his counterpart here , addressed this issue publicly . 
he called the mass imprisonment of Falun Gong members : 
... a troubling example of a government acting against those who test the limits of freedom . 
he went on to say : 
the Chinese government ' s targets are not political dissidents , and their practices and beliefs are unfamiliar to us . 
but the principle must surely still be the same : freedom of conscience and freedom of association . 
i would add that Mr. Clinton ' s remarks followed a similar expression of opinion last month by both Houses of the American Congress . 
in a concurrent resolution , both the House of Representatives and the Senate urged China to stop its persecution of the Falun Gong . 
the resolution pointed out , and rightly so , that the banning of the Falun Gong violates China ' s own constitution . 
it is also contrary to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
honourable senators , as Canadians finish celebrating Hanukkah and begin preparing for Christmas , we should all reflect on the fundamental values that these traditions represent . 
the Festival of Lights , the birth of Christ , and other similar celebrations remind us that there are transcendent values that all humans share and cherish . 
they remind us as well that there are places in the world where these values are denied and where the people who espouse them are persecuted . 
it is an appropriate time , I believe , for those of us who enjoy the fruits of liberty and democracy to pray for those of our fellow human beings who are denied them . 
in our prayers , honourable senators , we should ask that this government come to its senses and reclaim Canada ' s position as a leader in human rights everywhere in the world . 
on motion of Senator Poy , debate adjourned . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
motion Authorizing National Finance Committee to Study Estimates - Motion in Amendment - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Murray , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee present its report no later than March 31 , 2000 ; 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . ( Saint - Louis - de - Kent ) , seconded by the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , that the motion be amended by adding , after the words " Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 " , the following : 
" with the exception of Fisheries and Oceans Votes 1 , 5 and 10 ; 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in the Estimates for Fisheries and Oceans for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
in other words , I adjourned debate on behalf of Senator Stollery , who is not here at this time . 
i ask that this order now stand in the name of Senator Stollery . 
order stands . 
la Francophonie Summit 
inquiry - Debated Adjourned - Order Stands 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 27 ( 3 ) , I request that this inquiry stand until the Christmas adjournment . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Hays : 
i will provide an explanation , if senators wish . 
honourable senators , this inquiry will drop from the Order Paper at the next sitting , in that it has been on the Order Paper for 14 days . 
i can advise honourable senators that it is my intention to move that we adjourn until Monday at four o ' clock . 
senator Gauthier would like to speak to this inquiry on Tuesday . 
in order for it not to be dropped from Order Paper before that opportunity to speak arises , I am asking for leave to extend the time , so that it remains on the Order Paper until the Christmas adjournment . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Hays has now spoken to this inquiry . 
this side would not object to it now being seen to continue to stand in the name of Senator Gauthier , and that it be day one . 
this side is in complete agreement and concurs that Senator Gauthier would speak at a time certain on Tuesday next or any other day . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that Inquiry No. 1 , standing in the name of Senator Gauthier , stay on the Order Paper ? 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , it is fair and correct for Senator Kinsella to interpret my comments as speaking to the inquiry . 
in that case , as Senator Kinsella explained , the matter now is back to day one for the next sitting . 
that will achieve the purpose in a more elegant way , perhaps , than I had proposed . 
i think that is satisfactory . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I dispute the affirmation that Senator Hays or indeed Senator Kinsella has spoken to the inquiry . 
it is the privilege of the member who gives notice of the inquiry to have a first go at it . 
senator Gauthier has not yet spoken to this matter . 
to deduce that allowing anyone else to speak to an inquiry about which we know nothing has the effect of saving a day or bringing the item back to square one is a dangerous precedent to set . 
putting that aside , if we agree unanimously to bring the matter back to square one , regardless of the fact that Senator Gauthier has not yet spoken to it , that is another matter and I can agree to that . 
senator Kinsella : 
i agree completely with Senator Corbin ' s interpretation and advice . 
i think he is absolutely correct and I agree with him . 
my analysis was incorrect . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I think we would address the concerns of all if we said that Inquiry No. 1 should appear on the Order Paper at the next sitting under day one . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I may have an inquiry or a motion to which I may not be ready to speak next week . 
am I to use this as a precedent to ask to go back to day one without debate ? 
we must be careful how we use this . 
senator Gauthier has indicated that he will speak to the inquiry on Tuesday . 
let us just agree that he can speak to it on Tuesday , rather than invoke a blanket precedent - which would be tempting for others to invoke . 
let us judge each case on its own merits . 
senator Hays : 
if that is in order , I would ask honourable senators to agree to that . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to continue the motion under the name of Senator Gauthier until Tuesday next ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands . 
human Rights and Multi - Ethnic Conflicts 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) rose pursuant to notice of December 6 , 1999 : 
honourable senators , I should like to speak to this inquiry . 
mindful of the hour , I shall present an abridged version of my remarks . 
i wish to speak on the inquiry today because , as Senator Andreychuk indicated in her statement at the beginning of today ' s proceedings , tomorrow , December 10 , is International Human Rights Day . 
senator Di Nino also drew this fact to our attention a few moments ago when he addressed this chamber . 
December 10 , International Human Rights Day , is an important day in the world community . 
given that Canadians place such a high value on human rights , I think it is appropriate that , as the upper house of Parliament , we do give special focus to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
it is also important for us to recall that it was a distinguished Canadian who had a direct hand in the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which was proclaimed on December 10 , 1948 , by the General Assembly . 
this fall , at the United Nations , the current Secretary - General , Kofi Annan , in a report to the Security Council , of which Canada is presently one of the rotating members , spoke about the protection of civilians in armed conflicts . 
the Secretary - General stated that , despite the adoption of the various conventions on international , humanitarian and human rights law over the past 50 years , hardly a day goes by where we are not presented with evidence of intimidation , brutalization , torture and killing of helpless civilians in situations of armed conflict . 
whether we speak of mutilations in Sierra Leone , genocide in Rwanda , ethnic cleansing in the Balkans , or disappearances in Latin America , the parties to conflicts have acted with deliberate indifference to those conventions on human rights . 
honourable senators , the end of the Cold War saw the world liberated perhaps from the threat of all - out nuclear war . 
at the same time , however , since the fall of the Berlin Wall , over 4 million people have been killed in violent conflicts and there remain millions of refugees and internally displaced persons around the world . 
events in the Balkans and elsewhere in this decade alone have shown the critical need to come to grips with the complexities of modern multi - ethnic conflict . 
at the same time , we are horrified by terrible events such as those in Rwanda in 1994 . 
we recognize that these issues are tremendously complex . 
as the Secretary - General also noted , we recognize that the maintenance of international peace and security requires action at all stages of a conflict or potential conflict , whether to prevent it , minimize its effects and end it once it has begun , or pursue peacekeeping and peace - building , including reconciliation and the administration of justice after it has ended . 
canada participates vigorously in these international interventions , and we are proud that Canada and Canadians are able to make these types of contributions . 
all these actions are important . 
old ideas need to be questioned , including the notion of the primacy of state sovereignty and territorial integrity . 
as Secretary - General Annan argued in September : 
strictly traditional notions of sovereignty can no longer do justice to the aspirations of peoples everywhere to attain their fundamental freedoms .... 
massive and systematic violations of human rights - wherever they may take place - should not be allowed to stand . 
honourable senators , the international community must recognize that , with the end of the Cold War , the security of individuals , which includes their human rights , is becoming more important than the security of states . 
today , it is no longer assumed that international law gives greater priority to state sovereignty and territorial integrity than to human rights or self - determination . 
i submit , honourable senators , that following the protection of human rights as the first principle of international relations would go far toward preventing multi - ethnic conflict and encouraging greater democracy and peace . 
we need to get beyond the sovereignty of states principle , which has dominated international relations up until now . 
we need to refocus on the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the subsequently developed international treaties and conventions on human rights based on the universal declaration . 
honourable senators , unfortunately , we must acknowledge that states have , over the decades , often broken the undertakings contained in these human rights instruments . 
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , Mary Robinson , the former president of Ireland , admitted in a lecture on the eve of the fiftieth anniversary last year : 
count up the results of 50 years of human rights mechanisms , 30 years of multi - billion dollar development programs and endless high level rhetoric , the global impact is quite underwhelming .... 
this is a failure of implementation on a scale which shames us all . 
as the Human Rights High Commissioner Mrs. Robinson added : 
the normative work is largely done . 
the international human rights standards are in place . 
the task for us all ... is to implement them . 
on motion of Senator Beaudoin , debate adjourned . 
library of Parliament 
motion to Authorize Standing Joint Committee to Meet During Sittings of the Senate Withdrawn 
on Motion No. 32 : 
that the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament have power to sit during sittings and adjournments of the Senate ; and 
that a message be sent to the House of Commons to acquaint that House thereof . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I ask that this motion be withdrawn from the Order Paper . 
the matter has been addressed by the adoption of the first item under the heading " Reports of Committees " regarding the Standing Joint Committee on the Library of Parliament . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion withdrawn . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
motion to Authorize Committee to Study State of Health Care System - Debate Adjourned 
hon. Michael Kirby , pursuant to notice of December 6 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be authorized to examine and report upon the state of the health care system in Canada . 
in particular , the Committee shall be authorized to examine : 
( a ) The fundamental principles on which Canada ' s publicly funded health care system is based ; 
( d ) The pressures on and constraints of Canada ' s health care system ; and 
( e ) The role of the federal government in Canada ' s health care system ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 14 , 2001 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit any report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
these terms of reference have been unanimously approved by the committee members . 
the fundamental purpose of the study is to recognize the significant changes about to occur in the health care system due to several factors , including changing demographics , innovations in both pharmaceuticals and technology , and the changing expectations of individual Canadians for their health care entitlement . 
the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology are of the view that this is probably the most important and , equally , the most controversial social policy issue facing the country . 
the impact of costs on the health care system means that the current system is almost certainly not economically sustainable for the foreseeable future . 
the committee intends to undertake a series of studies that would all be linked by subject matter and by their logical progression upon predecessor studies . 
we want to provide a forum for debate on future health care policy in Canada in general and the role of the federal government in particular . 
we also hope to develop , over time , a series of policy recommendations for the federal government with respect to its role in the health care system . 
if the Senate approves this reference , the steering committee will proceed in the month of January to develop a detailed work plan that will be reviewed by committee members and then by the Internal Economy Committee . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
honourable senators , may I ask some questions ? 
has the chairman had any consultation with the Minister of Health on this subject ? 
if so , could he tell us the results of those discussions ? 
senator Kirby : 
if I had consulted with the Minister of Health and been told that he thought it unwise to do this study , then I would be in a difficult situation . 
if this motion is approved and a work plan is developed , I will be happy to talk to officials . 
i have not talked to the minister nor indeed , in detail , to any officials within the department . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , health issues cross jurisdictional borders between the federal government and the provincial governments . 
is the intention of the chairman to cooperate with or coordinate with the provincial jurisdictions in planning the future deliberations of the committee ? 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , I am hesitating to answer because the focus of the study would be on the federal role in health matters . 
to that extent , it would be desirable to hold discussions with and hear testimony from provincial government ministers and officials . 
there is absolutely no intention on the part of the committee to enter into provincial jurisdiction . 
our intent is to ask how current federal policy should be changed . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , delivery of health care is principally the responsibility of the provinces and the territories . 
health consumers are affected directly and mainly by the provinces . 
i wonder how this kind of study can be undertaken without some serious cooperation from those who deliver health services to the public . 
we will need to understand clearly how those roles may change in the future structure of health care . 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , I agree completely with Senator Di Nino . 
i was responding to the phrasing of his first question when I said the committee would hear witnesses from the provincial governments . 
similar to my reasons for not approaching the Minister of Health prior to Senate approval of this study , we are careful not to be seen to be approving or passing a study reference for a Senate committee based on some veto of the provincial governments . 
on the other hand , the provincial governments and many other organizations are integral participants in these issues and we will want to consult them as the process evolves . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I do not wish to prolong this debate . 
would I be creating a problem for the committee if I adjourned this debate until I can get some input from members of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology ? 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , there would only be a problem if the motion is not approved before the Christmas adjournment . 
if the Senate approves these terms of reference , we intend to work in January on a detailed work plan . 
i will not devote that effort if we do not have approval . 
senator Di Nino : 
i will not delay this . 
i wish to make another point , if I may . 
we undertake many studies , and much committee work , with little or no debate in this chamber . 
hence , when we spend $ 100,000 or more , the public is able , if they wish , to read the deliberations that have gone on in the chamber . 
that is a healthy thing . 
therefore , if you do not mind , we will deal with it next week and I will move adjournment of the debate . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Kirby for introducing this idea because it is something that the Senate could do and for which it is well qualified . 
i also thank Senator Di Nino for raising a point that I had thought about ; that is , that focusing on the provincial as well as federal is a very worthwhile thought . 
i also wish to mention that Senator Kirby ' s theory about not asking the health ministers for permission is a good one - after raising nine children who all used that system - not asking beforehand because it might be turned down , effectively . 
i am quite familiar with how it works and it does seem to work . 
in our public system , there is always a certain amount of private concern , such as the doctor ' s office , if nothing else . 
if the committee has the time , it might consider looking at that interface . 
as honourable senators know , that is a subject of strong debate . 
senator Kirby : 
honourable senators , may I say that , absolutely , that will be an issue that we will look at in some detail . 
other than the fact that it is fairly obvious if you look at social policy issues facing the country , whether in fact the current health system is sustainable is really the question . 
that is really what prompted us to get into this . 
however , three weeks or a month ago , the Government of Alberta made a policy statement with respect to some private - sector hospitals that would be built in Calgary . 
my personal reaction on reading the statement from the Government of Alberta is that their proposal is absolutely consistent with the Canada Health Act . 
i say that in spite of the fact that there were some very emotional remarks against the entire Alberta proposal , remarks made by a number of people , including some in the other place . 
by the way , many of those who have remarked claim that the Alberta government ' s proposal is not consistent with the Canada Health Act . 
it seems to me that , if we are to have a debate on health care policy , the debate at least ought to be based on facts . 
therefore , the private - sector issue is one that we must look at . 
i would agree completely . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , at the risk of repeating myself ad nauseam , I must express concern over the fact that the Senate is being asked for authority to , in effect , give a blank cheque to a committee . 
i am not faulting the purpose of any study when I say this , because it applies to all requests by committees for studies that are quite elaborate , detailed , and as open - ended as this one . 
this study will last a year and a half , perhaps longer if , for valid reasons , an extension is granted . 
senator Nolin has asked for a study that will last at least three years , without having a general work plan or a budget . 
what will this cost the Senate of Canada ? 
again , honourable senators , I think we do things upside down . 
we give the committee authority , and then Internal Economy and others must scramble for the funds , the personnel and whatever else is needed . 
the correct way to proceed would be for a committee first to determine its budget and its terms of reference , as well as the time frame within which to complete the study . 
i , for one , would feel more comfortable doing it that way , rather than just saying , " Go ahead and do it , " having given no consideration to budget and time frame . 
hon. Colin Kenny : 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
no , I did not . 
senator Di Nino : 
honourable senators , I do not believe that that is an appropriate question . 
i understand Senator Lynch - Staunton to be saying that we should review our current process , with a view to determining whether we can improve on it , by at least presenting some details as to costs before we approve the study . 
by not doing so , we could be approving a study that will in the end cost $ 40 million , which we do not have . 
i think the honourable senator ' s comments are valid . 
i hope to engage honourable senators , at least on this side of the chamber , who are members of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology on that issue as well , and hopefully we can have an open discussion on it next week . 
i do not wish to stifle debate , but I should be pleased to move the adjournment , unless someone else wishes to speak . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I find myself in agreement with both Senator Lynch - Staunton and Senator Kenny , despite the fact they are coming from diametrically opposed positions . 
let me tell you why . 
the Rules of the Senate do not allow a committee to ask for money before they have had the approval of their terms of reference . 
i happen to agree with Senator Lynch - Staunton that we are doing things backwards , that before we grant permission to a committee to undertake a study we should have some concept of what that study will cost . 
that is exactly why , when I made my request - I think it was two weeks ago - I gave the Senate a work plan and I told them the approximate cost of that work plan . 
incidentally , that budget went to the Internal Economy Committee this morning , where it was cut in half . 
internal Economy were of the view - a view that I happen to support - that they did not have a broad enough idea of what other committees would come forward with additional requests for information ; therefore , they decided they would do it in a step - by - step projection of the budgetary amounts . 
what we have identified this afternoon , it seems to me , is a problem with our rules and procedures . 
senator Kirby has presented , on behalf of the committee , a request for a special study , which every single member of that committee unanimously supported . 
he was , therefore , in a position where he needed to come before this Senate , according to our current rules , and present that and get permission before he could then prepare a budget to go to the budgetary subcommittee and eventually to the Internal Economy Committee . 
i do not disagree with the position that Senator Lynch - Staunton has put forward . 
in fact , I concur with him - and at another stage in my life it is something about which we had some discussions - because I think that is the way it should be done . 
senator Kenny : 
honourable senators , I do not see great fault in the way the rules are written , frankly . 
i do not believe that the Internal Economy Committee should be deciding for us what studies or inquiries go ahead . 
i have no difficulty with someone following Senator Carstairs ' model where they give a general estimate of what they think the study will cost . 
essentially , I see a two - step process . 
frankly , if both switches are not turned on , the study will not go forward . 
the first step is obtaining approval from the Senate . 
the next step is to go to the Internal Economy Committee to obtain what one hopes is appropriate funding . 
if the chairman does not receive approval here , there is no need to go to Internal Economy . 
if he receives approval here goes to Internal Economy and they do not have the funds to properly fund the study , that means the committee is hamstrung and cannot go ahead . 
i suppose the chairman could always come back here and appeal the report of the Internal Economy Committee , which is within the rights of any senator . 
i do think it is wrong to start with a committee and have them veto the project . 
on motion of Senator Di Nino , debate adjourned . 
adjournment 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notices of Motions : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Monday next , December 13 , 1999 , at 4 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Monday , December 13 , 1999 , at 4 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 20 
Monday , December 13 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Late Honourable R . James Balfour , Q . C . 
tribute 
the SENATE 
Monday , December 13 , 1999 
the Senate met at 4:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Late Honourable R . James Balfour , Q . C . 
tribute 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , out of respect for our deceased colleague the Honourable Senator Balfour , I ask that you all rise and join me in a moment of silence . 
honourable senators then stood in silent tribute . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as a mark of respect for our former colleague Senator Balfour , I move that the Senate do now adjourn . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 21 
Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
the Late Honourable R . James Balfour , Q . C . 
tributes 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Manitoba 
cross Lake First Nation - High Rate of Suicide 
new Brunswick 
bill to Create Holocaust Memorial Day 
special Olympics 
Ottawa - Winter Games 2000 
distinguished Visitor in the Gallery 
official Languages 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
revised Report of Committee 
adjournment 
Nisga ' a Final Agreement Bill 
first Reading 
appropriation Bill No. 2 , 1999 - 2000 
first Reading 
Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association 
delegation to 1999 Annual Session Held in Amsterdam , The Netherlands - Report Tabled 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
notice of Motion to Authorize Aboriginal Peoples Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study 
question PERIOD 
intergovernmental Affairs 
referendum Clarity Bill - Application of Terms 
supreme Court 
terminology Regarding Decision on Referendum Reference 
transport 
Nova Scotia - Federal Government Commitment to Twinning Highway 101 
finance 
allocation of Canada Pension Plan Credits in Marriage Breakups 
health 
possible Regulations Regarding Addition of Caffeine to Beverages 
request for Study of Effects of Caffeine 
delay in Release of Scientific Report 
fisheries and Oceans 
coast Guard - Provision of Cruises to Premiers 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
the Economy 
purchase of Major Companies by United States Firms - Government Policy 
elections Canada 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data - Transfer of Personal Data - Principle of Consent - Procedures for Security of Personal Data 
international Trade 
collapse of World Trade Organization Discussions - Agricultural Subsidies of Member States - Assistance to Canadian Farmers 
heritage 
status of Holocaust Memorial Museum 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
third Reading - Debate Suspended 
business of the Senate 
la francophonie summit 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
third Reading 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply Adopted 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Order Withdrawn 
public Service Whistle - blowing Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
royal Assent Bill 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Airline - Report of Transport and Communications Committee on Study - Debate Adjourned 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
second Report of Committee Adopted 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Estimates 
motion in Amendment Withdrawn 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly Held in St. Petersburg , Russia - Inquiry 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate 
motion to Uphold Royal Assent Proceedings - Motion Stands 
the SENATE 
Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
the Late Honourable R . James Balfour , Q . C . 
tributes 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , only last week I spoke with our dear colleague Jim Balfour whose death on Sunday night has saddened us all . 
he was , as he had been during his entire life - a life marked by more than one personal tragedy - stoic , forceful and , in particular , optimistic . 
he died after a long illness , one that involved difficult and painful treatments , yet his will to live never faltered . 
at no time did I hear him complain or even show signs of discouragement , even when he knew that all medical interventions had been exhausted . 
others can speak more knowledgeably of his laudable career than I , his career both private and public . 
what struck me about him are the personal characteristics that made him such a fine colleague and a friend . 
loyal , devoted and committed , he was always available when his vote was needed , no matter what pressing personal obligation might be disrupted , and always regretful when illness prevented him from attending to Senate business . 
how many times was he told that his health came first and how many times did he not listen ? 
only last year , during a period of remission , when his cancer seemed to have been beaten , he agreed with tremendous enthusiasm to assume the responsibility of chairing the Veterans Affairs Subcommittee upon the retirement of Senator Phillips . 
he believed that in that role he could help to improve the conditions of those who had served their country . 
he always regretted that fate intervened so brutally . 
in caucus , as in this chamber and in committee , his interventions were always listened to with great attention as his wisdom and logic allowed any discussion and debate to take on a special significance . 
to be wise is to have experience and knowledge and to judicially apply them . 
so did Jim , whether in Parliament as a distinguished member or in his home as a kind friend . 
there may be some consolation in the fact that the grief felt today is shared by some , but it does not reduce the immensity of our loss . 
to his family , I offer my heartfelt sympathy . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I mourn with other colleagues the loss of Senator Jim Balfour . 
senator Balfour was a friend of mine , as he was of many of you . 
i came to appreciate Jim Balfour and the incredible life experience he brought to this chamber from his work as a lawyer , a businessman , a member of Parliament and as an honourable senator . 
by virtue of that life experience , he could get to the heart of a problem and make an enormous contribution to the good governance of Canada through the Senate . 
i did not serve with Senator Balfour in this capacity , but I did observe him in his role as chair of the subcommittee looking into issues of national defence , particularly regarding Canada ' s peacekeeping role in the world . 
in 1993 , the committee he chaired tabled a report in this place that was absolutely prescient . 
he identified issues that , had they been addressed then , would have avoided many of the problems our peacekeeping efforts have encountered in recent years . 
senator Balfour loved his family . 
i know that from my friendship with him and from our many discussions during the illness of his wife and during important family events , including some tragic ones . 
we will miss Senator Balfour , his common sense and his vigour . 
i join with honourable senators in extending my deepest sympathy to his family . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , Jim Balfour and I had been friends for 38 years . 
to reflect on his life and death is something of a meditation on courage and forbearance . 
in 1958 , at the age of 30 , Jim Balfour lost his only brother to a long and painful illness . 
in 1990 , Jim and his wife , Jane , lost their youngest son tragically . 
in 1994 , Jane died after a prolonged and debilitating illness . 
in 1996 , Jim received from his physicians his own deadly prognosis . 
his was a gifted and successful , if much afflicted , family . 
his father was a member of the Supreme Court of Saskatchewan . Jim carried on in the Regina law firm that bore the Balfour name . 
he became a businessman and corporate director . 
he was a generous volunteer and then went into public life . 
he served seven years in the House of Commons and 20 years in the Senate . 
far from being self - absorbed and never , ever self - pitying , his attention to the very end was on his duty and his interests . 
to the inquiries of his friends about his health he was completely candid and realistic . 
then he would turn the conversation to the issues that occupied his mind and his time . 
in one such conversation I had with him recently , it was the state of Canada ' s military reserves , the anger in rural Saskatchewan , the war museum in Ottawa and , of course , the prospects of the federal Tory Party . 
he bore all his troubles casually , all his responsibilities seriously and with exemplary integrity . 
a truly honourable gentleman , the example of his life and death is a proud legacy to his family , friends and colleagues . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I wish to add my condolences to the family of Senator Balfour . 
when I arrived in Regina in 1976 to take up my position on the bench , I had already known of the Balfour family . 
one cannot walk the streets of Regina and not run into some landmark where that family has added its name and mark . 
i learned about Senator Balfour indirectly from the good works that had been left by him . 
in the profession , Jim Balfour had a quiet manner . 
he was always well prepared . 
he would not only tell them how to handle the case but he would explain the importance of looking at the broader issues , the deeper issues and the moral issues in any case before the court . 
he had a respect for the law that was not equalled by many in the province . 
senator Balfour was also known for his political deeds in Saskatchewan . Personally , having met him , I wondered how he must have gone door to door because he certainly did not have the personality and the exuberance one often associates with politicians . 
yet as I got to know Regina , a city which was not my home , I realized that his quiet concern for virtually every issue was important to the people of his city and his province . 
he would find a way to make known his views on an issue and seek a solution that would be of benefit to the community . 
i do not think there was an issue on which he did not have a quiet hand . 
he would not take the presidency or the most public position , but always he would be in the backroom giving advice . 
he gave the kind of leadership that marks someone as a statesman and not just a politician . 
with him , the two were synonymous . 
senator Balfour was very influential in the city of Regina . 
working in a smaller community can be difficult when great funds are needed and great issues must be tackled . 
his quiet hand , again , was on many of the community ' s services . 
therefore , he touched a broader community , those who normally would not have been associated with Senator Balfour and who would not have been known here . 
those of us from Regina can go to many of the community services and talk to the people and find that somewhere , again in a backroom , Senator Balfour had his hand in making the world of the average citizen in Regina a little better . 
senator Balfour will be missed but his good works will live on . 
many in Regina knew of his illness and privately hoped that he would overcome it one more time . 
however , the signal to many of us was when he went to his family and started documenting their history in Saskatchewan , again in a quiet and charming way . 
we knew this was not the man who always seemed to look to the future , and many of his friends realized he was preparing for the inevitable . 
honourable senators , Jim Balfour will be remembered , and I hope his family will find some consolation in the works he has left behind . 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I rise , too , on hearing of the death of Jim Balfour . 
a few things always happen upon being appointed to the Senate . 
one is that you get to meet people whom you have heard about , and Jim Balfour was one of those people . 
Jim did something that was a real political accomplishment in Saskatchewan - he won a seat for the Conservative Party in Regina . 
for those honourable senators who do not know Regina , John Diefenbaker was asked by his campaign manager during the campaign of 1958 what should be done in the campaign in Regina , and he said , " Drop a bomb on it . " 
it is known to us in the political business as " Red Square . " 
every left winger in Saskatchewan is gathered in Regina . 
Jim Balfour did something that few Conservatives have been able to do . 
i believe that when the people of Regina gave him a victory in that election , they showed what they thought of Jim Balfour . 
i believe that victory brought him to the attention of Mr. Clark , who appointed him to the Senate in 1979 . 
i did not know Jim that well , although I had heard of him . 
one of the good things that happened to me was that I was able to get to know him better while I served in the caucus with him . 
i admired his integrity and his honesty . 
honourable senators , I will reveal something about the caucus that I have attended for six years , and that is Jim Balfour ' s ability to cut to the chase . 
he was a man of few words , but he was always on the mark and his advice was highly respected by all of us . 
i will miss that advice . 
on behalf of my family and on behalf of the city from which I come , I can say that Jim did a lot for our province . 
he was always on the right side of the issues , and we will miss him . 
to his family , I extend our deepest condolences and sympathy . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I ask you to rise and join me in a moment of silence , in memory of our departed colleague and friend the Honourable Senator James Balfour . 
honourable senators then stood in silent tribute . 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
Manitoba 
cross Lake First Nation - High Rate of Suicide 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I should like to bring to the attention of the Senate a tragic condition in existence in Cross Lake First Nation , a reserve located in northern Manitoba , south of Thompson . 
honourable senators , in the last five months , seven residents in a community of 4,000 have taken their own lives . 
in addition , 100 other residents have attempted suicide in this five - month period . 
these statistics are horrendous and cannot be ignored . 
this story has additional alarming aspects . 
normally , initiatives directed against suicides in communities are directed toward young men because they have always been the principal group in danger of suicide . 
however , at Cross Lake First Nation , the majority of the people attempting suicide have been between the ages of 20 and 30 and of both genders . 
the youngest attempt in the last several months was by a nine - year - old . 
it is hard for me to judge the despair that would encompass a nine - year - old such that he would put a gun to his head . 
it is also hard to imagine that despair in a 59 - year - old grandmother . 
honourable senators , this crisis must be addressed . 
at the end of September , a 24 - hour crisis line was established . 
i can only assume that this crisis line has been effective in keeping the numbers higher on the attempted suicide side rather than on the successful side . 
however , that funding of $ 15,000 runs out soon . 
clearly , we must ensure that additional funding is provided in order that this crisis line remains in effect . 
far more important , honourable senators , we must address the systemic problems in this community leading to these horrendous results . 
new Brunswick 
a private member ' s bill was introduced by Tory MLA Eric MacKenzie to set aside one day every year as Holocaust Memorial Day . 
when the legislature approves the bill this week , my home province of New Brunswick will become the third province in Canada to proclaim a day to remember the evil of which mankind is capable - the systematic murder of millions of men , women and children - and to remember the thousands of soldiers , men and women , who fought overseas to defeat the killing machine of the Third Reich and liberate the death camps . 
the first Holocaust Memorial Day in New Brunswick will be observed on May 2 , 2000 . 
the Province of Ontario enacted similar legislation last year and the Government of Prince Edward Island passed a Holocaust Memorial Day law last week . 
to all of these provinces , I say thank you . 
in tabling the legislation , Mr. MacKenzie said : 
at the end of the most violent century in human history , we share an obligation to the new millennium to mark and learn the lessons of history . 
as George Santayana wrote : 
those who cannot remember history are doomed to repeat it . 
the timing of this motion on December 9 was appropriate as the international community marked two important human rights anniversaries . 
December 9 is the fifty - first anniversary of the United Nations Genocide Convention that made genocide a violation of international law , and December 10 marks the fifty - first anniversary of the proclamation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . 
i am proud of the new legislation by the Lord government acknowledging one of the grossest violations of human rights . 
the memory of the Holocaust should provide the impetus for active opposition to racism and hatred . 
we only have to scan the newspapers to read each day of incidents of evil that underscore the dark side of human existence . 
honourable senators , because time stills the voices of the survivors , it is incumbent on us to speak out on the lessons of the Holocaust as parliamentarians , as community leaders , and , indeed , as members of the human race . 
if I may indulge in a moment of partisanship , honourable senators , you will note that all three provinces proclaiming Holocaust Memorial Day are governed by the Progressive Conservative Party . 
i hope that the federal government will soon follow suit and proclaim Holocaust Memorial Day a national day of remembrance . 
special Olympics 
Ottawa - Winter Games 2000 
hon. Janis Johnson : 
honourable senators , I wish to draw your attention to a particular event today because we may be leaving here this week . 
i do so as a member of the Canadian Special Olympics Foundation and a long - time volunteer . 
the event of which I speak will last for five days , starting on Tuesday , January 25 , 2000 , when the City of Ottawa and Canada ' s capital region will host the Canadian Special Olympics Winter Games . 
approximately 600 athletes and 200 coaches from across Canada will participate in the games . 
an estimated 600 parents and 1,200 volunteers will also come to support the athletes . 
the Special Olympics have come to Ottawa once before , in 1981 , when we hosted the summer games . 
this time , of course , it will be the winter events . 
we will be seeing competition in such sports as alpine skiing , figure skating , curling and snowshoeing . 
many of us have great regard for the cause of the Special Olympics , but not everyone realizes that these games are high - calibre sporting events that , for sheer drama , could compete with any athletic competition . 
this was the intent of Dr. Frank Hayden of McMaster University , who dedicated his life to the cause of physical fitness . 
you may remember his famous " 5 BX program , " which he developed with the Royal Canadian Air Force . 
Dr. Hayden took issue with the popular assumption that children , and later adults , with mental handicaps were unable to participate in sport and recreation programs . 
working with a group of children on an intense fitness program , Dr. Hayden proved that the mentally handicapped could develop high enough skills to compete as international athletes . 
he went on to found the Special Olympics . 
the games were first held in 1968 at Soldier Field in Chicago and now the Special Olympics have over 1 million participants in 140 countries . 
all of these are enhanced by the appreciation and support of an audience . 
i would ask all honourable senators to try and attend one of the Special Olympics events during the week of January 25 . 
you will be most impressed by the dedication and heroism of our athletes . 
i have attended many Special Olympics events nationally and internationally . 
for me , these games symbolize what sport can do for individuals and what growth is possible in the human body and spirit when you truly try , as do our athletes . 
the Special Olympics oath says it well . 
it is read at the beginning of each games by an athlete who then lights the Olympic flame . 
it states : 
let me win , but if I cannot win let me be brave in the attempt . 
honourable senators , I hope to see you at the games . 
distinguished Visitor in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of our colleague and recently retired friend the Honourable Senator Marian Maloney . 
official Languages 
second Report of Standing Joint Committee Presented 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool , Joint Chair of the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages , presented the following report : 
Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 
the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages has the honour to table its 
second REPORT 
the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages adopted the following resolution in committee on December 7 , 1999 : 
be IT RESOLVED , - That , in the opinion of the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages of the Senate and the House of Commons of Canada , the Ontario legislature should determine , by way of legislation , that the City of Ottawa , as Canada ' s capital , has two official languages , English and French . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Losier - Cool , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
revised Report of Committee 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate , I wish to present a revised version of the fifth report of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs on Bill C - 4 , the Civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Act . 
for technical reasons , the observations that should have been included with our report presented Thursday , December 9 , 1999 , were inadvertently omitted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs has the honour to present its 
revised FIFTH REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill C - 4 , to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts , has examined the said Bill in obedience to its Order of Reference dated December 1 , 1999 , and now reports the same without amendment , but with the following observations : 
the Committee has two specific concerns that it wishes to see addressed . 
first , the Committee is keenly interested in perusing ( a ) the regulations deemed by the Governor in Council to be required to carry out the purposes of the Act and to give effect to the above - mentioned Agreement , and ( b ) the Code of Conduct that will establish the chain of command affecting the astronauts on the space station . 
the Committee , concerned about the insufficient scope of the provision for notification to Parliament contained in Clause 10 of Bill C - 4 , requests that the Government of Canada , through the Canadian Space Agency , refer both the said regulations and the Code of Conduct directly to the Committee immediately following their initial publication in The Canada Gazette . 
second , Clause 11 ( 2.34 ) 
fails to contain a definition of the term " Canadian flight element " employed in the English version of Clause 11 ( 2.31 ) 
( b ) . 
the Government of Canada , in the omnibus bill that is anticipated shortly , should clarify Clause 11 ( 2.31 ) 
so as to alleviate the Committee ' s concerns . 
respectfully submitted , 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until tomorrow , Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
Nisga ' a Final Agreement Bill 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 9 , to give effect to the Nisga ' a Final Agreement . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
hon. Jack Austin : 
with leave , at the next sitting of the Senate . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
some Hon. Senators : 
No. 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , in the normal course , a notice of two days is required before we can proceed with debate at second reading stage , and I understand that leave has not been granted to abridge that period . 
accordingly , this matter should be placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
there being no agreement , this bill will be placed on the Order Paper for second reading on Thursday next , December 16 , 1999 . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , if it is the wish of this house , perhaps we could give unanimous consent to dispose of this bill that has been studied so extensively in the other place ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that the bill be placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , December 16 , 1999 ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill placed on the Orders of the Day for second reading on Thursday next , December 16 , 1999 . 
appropriation Bill No. 2 , 1999 - 2000 
first Reading 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that a message had been received from the House of Commons with Bill C - 21 , granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the Public Service for the financial year ending March 31 , 2000 . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
delegation to 1999 Annual Session Held in Amsterdam , The Netherlands - Report Tabled 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the third report of the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association which represented Canada at the forty - fifth annual session held in Amsterdam , The Netherlands , November 11 to 15 , 1999 . 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
notice of Motion to Authorize Aboriginal Peoples Committee to Extend Date of Final Report on Study 
hon. Charlie Watt : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on Wednesday next , December 15 , 1999 , I will move : 
that , notwithstanding the Order of the Senate adopted on Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , the Standing Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report on the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples ( Sessional paper 2 / 35 - 508 . ) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and , in particular , seek the comments of Aboriginal peoples and of other interested parties on : 
2 . the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships ; and 
3 . the models of Aboriginal self - government required to respond to the needs of Aboriginal peoples and to complement these new structural relationships ; 
that the committee be empowered to submit its final report no later than February 16 , 2000 , and that the committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the committee contained in the final report until February 29 , 2000 , and 
that the committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
question PERIOD 
intergovernmental Affairs 
referendum Clarity Bill - Application of Terms 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , clause 2 . ( 2 ) of the bill on the clarity of the referendum process sets out factors to be considered by the House of Commons in determining whether a clear majority of Quebecers has expressed a will to secede . 
you will remember that in the last referendum 49.6 per cent of Quebecers voted in favour of a sovereign Quebec in a partnership with the rest of Canada . 
conversely , 50.4 per cent of Quebecers were opposed to that option . 
if we take a closer look at these percentages on the basis of ethnicity , data provided by Statistics Canada and results by areas , we come to the conclusion , which is shared by just about every expert , that 62 per cent of francophones voted in favour of sovereignty , whereas 95 per cent of anglophones and 98 per cent of allophones voted against the Parti Qu é b é cois ' option . 
considering that francophones account for the majority of Quebecers and that the anglophone and allophone votes are concentrated in certain defined areas of the province , could the minister tell us if , in the event of a Yes victory by separatists - something that does not at all appeal to me - the ethnic and geographical distribution of the vote would be taken into account in determining the clarity of the majority of voters who will have supported that option ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the issues are twofold , as the Supreme Court clearly pointed out . 
first the question should be clear , and the bill speaks to that issue very well . 
the second issue is what is considered a clear majority , and that is the matter to which the honourable senator refers . 
the court , in its deliberations and in its judgment , was very careful not to attempt to define in any detail exactly what factors would be taken into account well in advance of the vote . 
the bill makes reference to certain factors that are to be considered . 
the bill is very careful not to prejudge or outline precisely at what point the bar might be set , as tempting as that might have been in some circumstances . 
the bill in that respect is clearly consistent with the judgment of the Supreme Court . 
senator Nolin : 
honourable senators , that is why I gave percentages in my preamble . 
no expert has contested the fact that the majority of Quebec francophones , 62 per cent , voted Yes to the Parti Qu é b é cois question in the 1995 referendum . 
on the other hand , 95 per cent of anglophones and 98 per cent of allophones voted No. 
is your bill not assigning lesser importance to the vote of the francophone majority than to the anglophone and allophone minority ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , there is no attempt in the legislation to place more value on one element of the vote than on another . 
certain conditions will be reviewed in assessing the quality of the majority . 
some of those conditions are set out in the legislation while others are not . 
that is due to the fact that one may not be able to anticipate at the time precisely what considerations will come into play . 
however , the bill clearly provides for open consideration of all the factors . 
the bottom line is that the people of Quebec , regardless of their background , must speak clearly , with a clear majority , on their intentions , and that view must be expressed as a result of a clear question having been put to them . 
senator Nolin : 
honourable senators , would a clear majority not mean a majority of each ethnic component of the population of Quebec ? 
senator Finestone : 
honourable senators , am I a second - class citizen ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would resist , as a matter of principle , determining in advance the specific levels required to establish that question . 
the legislation goes to great pains to follow the Supreme Court decision , and it states that one must look at the circumstances which exist at the time of a future referendum , and the political actors of the day will do that . 
hopefully , that will never happen . 
however , that is not the point . 
i must repeat , the legislation clearly follows closely the rationale of the Supreme Court decision , which says that , at the time , the political actors will address the question of a sufficient majority . 
the proposed legislation very specifically outlines some of the factors that will be taken into account . 
hon. Jean - Claude Rivest : 
honourable senators , as far as national unity is concerned , I will remind the minister that , in the recent history of Canada , the only effective way of combating Quebec separatism has been for the Government of Canada to have a vision for the future regarding relations between Quebec and Canadian society as a whole . 
i refer in particular to the time of Lester B . Pearson or Brian Mulroney , when support for separatism dropped by 20 or 25 per cent . 
historically , in Quebec there have been two ways in which the sovereignist or separatist parties have tried to win Quebecers over to the idea of independence : the referendum approach , to gain a Yes majority in answer to the question , and the plurality of seats won in the National Assembly in an election , as in 1966 with the RIN , and in 1970 and 1973 with Ren é L é vesque ' s Parti Qu é b é cois . 
using the later option , a sovereignist government would have declared Quebec ' s sovereignty . 
the current government bill addresses only the referendum approach . 
what would become of Canada ' s unity if a sovereignist party in Quebec went back to what Ren é L é vesque was proposing in the early 1970 s , namely that the election of a clearly sovereignist PQ government would mean that a simple majority of members in the National Assembly could set in motion the province ' s separation from the rest of Canada ? 
the bill is silent on this . 
as an illustration of how preposterous the federal government ' s intervention in this debate is , there is the first scenario where the Parti Qu é b é cois would announce that the election of a sovereignist government gave it a mandate to declare independence , as was the case in 1970 and 1973 . 
they did not win , but that was their program . 
under this scenario , would the federal government pass a bill defining the nature of the Parti Qu é b é cois ' election platform in order to clarify its sovereignty option ? 
you will understand why the Government of Canada ' s position is not accepted by all stakeholders in Quebec and why it is preposterous . 
why does the Canadian government not express its opinion , as it is entitled to do ? 
as the primary guardian of national unity , it is entirely within its rights to do so . 
but it must leave it to the National Assembly , and particularly to the Liberal Party of Quebec , the voice of the federalists in Quebec , to argue about the clarity of the question and about what would constitute a majority . 
this would be a far greater service to the federalist , Canadian unity option . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the honourable senator ' s question is rather complex both in its length and in its nature . 
the Premier of Quebec has served notice that he intends to bring on another referendum when winning conditions permit . 
surely , as responsible citizens and as a responsible federal government , we must respond to that statement . 
what the government is suggesting is simple and obvious . 
we have a responsibility take the Premier of Quebec at his word . 
if he comes forward with another referendum , we must ensure that he does so with a clear question and understands that , before he can act , he must achieve a clear majority . 
i cannot see how anyone in Quebec or in any other part of the country could object to that . 
does the Premier of Quebec not intend to bring forward a clear question ? 
does he intend to act in other circumstances ? 
what precisely is his objection ? 
as I recall , the Premier of Quebec was high in his praise of the decision . 
one of the fundamental elements of that decision was that the people of Canada and the Government of Canada have a role to play . 
i , for one , would hate to see the government abdicate that role . 
senator Rivest : 
honourable senators , the minister suggested to me that the government decided to act at this time because the Premier of Quebec announced he wanted to hold a referendum . 
why did the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau , guardian of national unity , not decide to introduce a bill to determine the parameters of the question and of the majority when , the day after his election in 1976 , Ren é L é vesque announced that he planned to hold a referendum on sovereignty ? 
was the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau not as concerned about Canadian unity and protecting the interests of all Canadians as the present Prime Minister of Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , Prime Minister Trudeau was very interested in the issue of Canadian unity . 
however , we have a situation that apparently has the approval of the Premier of Quebec and certainly the Prime Minister of Canada , where the Supreme Court has elucidated on this topic in a way that is unprecedented in our history . 
the decision was not available to us previously ; it is available now . 
as I recall , that decision received approbation from the Premier of Quebec . 
in its decision , the Supreme Court laid out some very clear criteria . 
it gives the federal government a reasonable opportunity to put these issues in clear perspective at a time when we are not in the middle of a referendum battle . 
essentially , the government is insisting on two simple but fundamental points . 
if any province , not just Quebec , wants to separate from this country , it must put a question clearly to its citizens and it must have a clear answer . 
that is true whether it is Alberta , B.C. or Nova Scotia , and surely , nothing can be more reasonable than that . 
however , the obligation on the federal government is not to act if those circumstances are not present . 
senator Rivest : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question . 
could the minister quote for us the passage from the Supreme Court of Canada decision requiring the Canadian Parliament to pass legislation ? 
does the Supreme Court of Canada decision , which states what the minister just told us , and I am happy to agree , have force of law in Canada ? 
why not let Jean Charest and the Liberal Party of Quebec fight the battle and remind the present Government of Quebec that - 
- the law of the land is laid down in the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada . 
we do not need Mr. Dion ' s bill . 
senator Boudreau : 
that is a different argument , honourable senators . 
if one says that we do not need it or the timing is wrong , then clearly one would suggest there is no disagreement . 
the Supreme Court indicated , quite clearly , that these were factors that should be considered . 
i would be happy to supply a copy of the Supreme Court decision to the honourable senator . 
senator Ghitter : 
answer the question ! 
senator Boudreau : 
what this legislation shows is that there are responsibilities on both sides . 
the Government of Canada has clearly embraced its responsibility here . 
the federal government has put its position before the people of this country in a very reasonable way , and it has indicated what factors would be involved to determine the conditions laid out in the Supreme Court decision . 
these factors will be very helpful to any citizen of any Canadian province to have before them before they make a final decision - that is , if they are asked to make such a decision . 
supreme Court 
terminology Regarding Decision on Referendum Reference 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I have counted 10 times , in the brief series of questions that we have had so far on this matter , the word " decision " being used by the Leader of the Government in the Senate with reference to the opinion that was rendered by the Supreme Court of Canada . 
it seems to me , if we are to be dealing with a matter of such critical import , that we must be very careful and precise in our wording . 
does the minister not agree that the reference that was made by the Government of Canada and submitted to the Supreme Court was not for a decision but , rather , an opinion ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , as the honourable senator states , it was referred and the Supreme Court of Canada has issued its opinion , and I agree . 
it was an opinion that was welcomed at the time by the Premier of Quebec . 
transport 
Nova Scotia - Federal Government Commitment to Twinning Highway 101 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , I should like to know when we are going to get those helicopters . 
i should also like to know where the Minister of Transport and the President of Onex are today . 
however , I thought the minister might be a bit more conversant with the following question . 
as the minister is aware , there seems to be confusion over federal commitments to aid the Province of Nova Scotia in twinning Highway 101 through the Annapolis Valley . 
could the minister indicate to the chamber what commitment has been made to our province in this regard ? 
if he does not have an immediate answer at hand , perhaps he might be prepared to let us have a written one at his earliest convenience . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I will certainly check with the Minister of Transport as to whether there are any recent developments . 
i was recently at a meeting where this subject came up for discussion between the minister and , I believe , a member from the other place who represents the particular area in question . 
as the honourable senator would know from experience , the selection of highway projects is within the a jurisdiction of the provinces . 
they determine the priorities then meet with the federal government to request financing . 
the federal funding covers some of the cost of these roads and is provided on the basis of the provincial government ' s priority list . 
it is my understanding that the minister indicated he might consider a request should it come from the provincial government . 
in fact , special provision might be made . 
however , to the best of my knowledge , no such request has come forward to date . 
i qualify that because I have not spoken to the minister on this matter in the last week and a half . 
finance 
allocation of Canada Pension Plan Credits in Marriage Breakups 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
only one of those five issues was ever mentioned in the government ' s news release , and that was a decision to keep on looking for ways to ensure that the CPP credits are split upon marriage breakup , as the law requires . 
far too often , this does not happen , even though the law makes it mandatory . 
we have been told that the federal and provincial governments are still trying to deal with this issue . 
nothing has changed in the last two years . 
could the government leader advise the Senate as to whether the words " exploring the possibility " are a fancy way of saying , " Well , maybe we will and maybe we won ' t " ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I do not know to what extent the government , specifically the Minister of Finance , is reviewing that particular issue . 
however , I would be more than happy to make the inquiry and bring back a response to the honourable senator . 
senator Oliver : 
i thank the leader for that . 
honourable senators , as the minister knows , most Canadian women live out their final years in poverty , after staying at home while their husbands are out in the workforce , and they have no pension . 
could the Leader of the Government report back on two other things ? 
first , could he advise the Senate as to the exact state of the explorations and the possible pilot project ? 
second , could he tell us why , two years later , this problem has still not been resolved , particularly for those women who have worked in the home and not gone outside the home to work ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would be more than happy to include those additional requests for information . 
health 
possible Regulations Regarding Addition of Caffeine to Beverages 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , there has been a series of newspaper stories in The Ottawa Citizen on the caffeine question which is now before Health Canada . 
the question is whether to allow soft drink makers to add caffeine to beverages such as Mountain Dew . 
last spring , this chamber unanimously passed a motion on the matter , and this series of articles raises new questions . 
i should like to ask a couple of them . 
first , can the Leader of the Government in the Senate indicate whether or not the government will abide by the Senate ' s motion and maintain this country ' s current regulations , which do not allow caffeine to be added to citrus soft drinks , until there is evidence that the health of Canadians , especially children and young people , will not be harmed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for that question . 
i am not aware at the present time of any change to current government policy , but I will inquire of the Minister of Health to ensure that I am up - to - date on that topic . 
request for Study of Effects of Caffeine 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , there is a report which will be coming to the minister , but we have written him a number of letters in addition to this resolution urging him not to do anything , to " just say no . " 
the stories quote Health Canada officials as saying that they have no figures on the amount of caffeine Canadians are already ingesting from soft drinks , chocolate , coffee , and tea - all the sources . 
they say they are left with two choices . 
they can rely on the figures that industry gives them , or they can make up a worst - case scenario . 
i would suggest there is a third . 
they can have Statistics Canada generate the baseline data . 
can the honourable minister ask the Minister of Health to require evidence from an unbiased source in determining whether the health of Canadians will or will not be harmed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am uncertain from the honourable senator ' s question whether she is suggesting that the requirement be placed on Statistics Canada forms . 
senator Spivak : 
yes , to generate that baseline data . 
senator Boudreau : 
in fact , I believe that the process of designing and determining the information is underway now . 
i am not sure what stage it has reached , but I will make inquiries . 
i will pass along the honourable senator ' s request . 
senator Spivak : 
thank you . 
delay in Release of Scientific Report 
hon. Mira Spivak : 
honourable senators , just to clarify , The Canada Gazette has already issued a notice that the proposal from Pepsi - Cola be agreed to , and in so doing it stated , quite baldly , that no studies had been done and that the main purpose was to harmonize Mountain Dew , for example , with the American formula . 
as you know , Mountain Dew contains more caffeine than many cups of coffee . 
young children , including my grandchildren , after they finish playing hockey , think nothing of having a Mountain Dew or a sport drink . 
now we are letting loose caffeine upon them . 
caffeine is a psychoactive drug , and it should be labelled as a drug . 
at any rate , the report from the committee of scientists which is responding to the minister was , as I understand , completed last July . 
could the honourable minister also check why , if it was completed last July , the publication of that report has been delayed ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
i would be happy , on behalf of the honourable senator , to make that further inquiry . 
with respect to the substance of the question , one always must strike a balance between the extent to which human activity is regulated by government and the extent to which freedom of choice is available . 
i recognize the legitimacy of the honourable senators ' concern ; however , I do not think we are about to pass legislation to bar minors from Tim Hortons . 
senator Spivak : 
honourable senators , I cannot let that comment go by . 
we are not passing legislation . 
we are attempting to protect young children from a psychoactive drug being added to something which they consume . 
there are many other things like that . 
this is not regulation ; this is prevention for the health of young children . 
do not confuse the two . 
senator Boudreau : 
i take the honourable senator ' s point . 
i just mention , though , that there is a balance to be struck . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I hear the Honourable Senator Kinsella , I would advise that this will be the last question within the time period allocated for Question Period . 
fisheries and Oceans 
coast Guard - Provision of Cruises to Premiers 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , last summer the Canadian Coast Guard vessel Sir Humphrey Gilbert was used to take Premier Tobin and his cabinet on a cruise off the coast of Newfoundland . 
as a political minister from Nova Scotia , would the minister undertake to make similar arrangements for Premier Hamm and his colleagues this summer ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , not only must I decline the honourable senator ' s invitation , I also give him my personal assurances that I will not undertake any such venture . 
delayed Answers to Oral Questions 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have a response to a question raised in the Senate on November 24 , 1999 by Senator Oliver regarding the purchase of major companies by United States firms ; a response to questions raised in the Senate on November 30 , 1999 by Senator Spivak and Senator Andreychuk regarding Manitoba , loss of confidential data , transfer of personal data , principle of consent procedures for security of personal data ; a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 6 , 1999 by Senator Andreychuk regarding the collapse of World Trade Organization discussions on the agricultural subsidies member states and assistance to Canadian farmers ; and , finally , a response to a question raised in the Senate on December 8 , 1999 by Senator Kenny regarding the status of the Holocaust Memorial Museum . 
the Economy 
purchase of Major Companies by United States Firms - Government Policy 
( response to question raised by Hon. Donald H . Oliver on Novembee 24 , 1999 ) 
while foreign purchases of Canadian companies have increased recently , these trends should be considered over a longer horizon . 
Canadian direct investment abroad has expanded by even more than inward investment over the 1990 s , to the extent that Canadians now own more direct investments abroad than foreigners hold in this country . 
the exchange rate is only one of many factors that influence foreigners to invest in Canada . 
in fact , the recent increase in foreign purchases of Canadian companies has coincided with a strengthening of the Canadian dollar . 
ultimately , in a world that competes for investment dollars , foreign direct investment in Canada is an expression of confidence in our economy . 
Canadian Direct Investment abroad 
$ billion 
quarterly Rates 
foreign Direct Investment in Canada 
$ billion 
quarterly Rates 
98 Q 1 
8.1 
7.8 
98 Q 2 
6.3 
3.6 
98 Q 3 
14.9 
8.3 
98 Q 4 
10.2 
4.7 
99 Q 1 
4.5 
3.2 
elections Canada 
Manitoba - Loss of Confidential Data - Transfer of Personal Data - Principle of Consent - Procedures for Security of Personal Data 
( response to questions raised by Hon. Mira Spivak and Hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk on November 30 , 1999 ) 
the government is committed to the protection of personal information , and , in particular , to ensuring that information about individuals is only used and disclosed in accordance with the law . 
elections Canada shares this commitment . 
in setting up the Register of Electors , Elections Canada sought the advice of many experts , including the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada . 
to maintain the Register , Elections Canada receives information from the federal , provincial and territorial governments . 
federal government data suppliers ( i . e . , Revenue Canada and Citizenship and Immigration Canada ) will only pass information about individuals to Elections Canada with the consent of those individuals . 
to obtain this consent , Revenue Canada has added a box to income tax returns that filers can check off if they agree to have only specified data ( name , address , date of birth ) forwarded to Elections Canada . 
a similar change has been made to citizenship application forms so that new Canadians can provide their consent to have personal data transferred to Elections Canada . 
elections Canada also has agreements with provincial and territorial governments ( e . g . , motor vehicle registrars and vital statistics registrars ) for the provision of information to update the Register of Electors . 
these agreements are based on the premise that the data supplier has authority to disclose the information . 
the issue of consent is therefore determined by the governing legislation in each province or territory . 
once Elections Canada has received information from its suppliers , the law provides that it can only be used for electoral purposes . 
to safeguard the information in the Register of Electors , Elections Canada , from the time the Register was created , put in place sophisticated security monitoring systems ( both human and technical ) and well - documented data handling and processing procedures . 
following the loss of the tape containing information on Manitoba drivers , Elections Canada contracted an independent security firm to audit all aspects of its tape transfer procedures . 
canada ' s Privacy Commissioner , Mr. Bruce Phillips , has conducted his own investigation . 
he concurred with the results of the audit . 
" having considered all the circumstances of this case , there is no doubt in my mind that simple human error contributed to the loss of the tape , " wrote Mr. Phillips . 
" i am satisfied that Elections Canada has put in place a number of measures to ensure that this does not happen again , and I do not believe that additional recommendations beyond those already identified are required at this time . " 
it is also important to note that the Privacy Commissioner , as well as the jurisdictions supplying data to update the National Register of Electors , have the right to audit Elections Canada ' s entire process at any time - examining how information for the Register is collected , stored , updated and used - to ensure that the electors ` right to privacy is respected . 
international Trade 
collapse of World Trade Organization Discussions - Agricultural Subsidies of Member States - Assistance to Canadian Farmers 
( response to question raised by Hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk on December 6 , 1999 ) 
the Government of Canada is committed to creating a stronger , more efficient grain handling and transportation system , with greater accountability and more benefits to farmers . 
the objective of the Government is to ensure that producers benefit from changes to the grain and transportation system arising from the recommendations of Justice Estey and the proposals of Mr. Arthur Kroeger . 
it should be emphasized that the Government of Canada has always stated throughout this process that particular attention should be given to ensuring that producers share in the benefits resulting from a more commercial and competitive system . 
the Minister of Transport , the Honourable David Collenette , has received the stakeholders ' reports and Mr. Kroeger ' s recommendations in September . 
the Minister of Transport , with the support of the Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board and the Minister of Agriculture and Agri - Food Canada , is examining these reports to determine the best means of moving forward towards a more commercially oriented system . 
the Government will carefully study the stakeholder ' s report and Mr. Kroeger ' s recommendations , along with the work done on the port , hopper car disposal and road repair issues , before proceeding with the implementation of a reform package . 
heritage 
status of Holocaust Memorial Museum 
( response to question raised by Hon. Colin Kenny on December 8 , 1999 ) 
the Government acknowledges the importance for all Canadians to learn about crimes against humanity , such as the Holocaust , and to understand the lessons of the past as we move into the next millennium . 
no commitment has been made by the Government nor by the Department of Canadian Heritage regarding the establishment of a Holocaust Museum . 
pursuant to the discussions surrounding the accommodation needs of the Canadian War Museum , the Canadian Museum of Civilization has been asked by officials of the Department of Canadian Heritage , on behalf of the Minister , to undertake consultations on how best to commemorate the Holocaust and other acts of genocide . 
however , a time frame for theses consultations has not been established . 
while the Government recognizes the importance of learning about the tragedy of crimes against humanity in the 20 th century , its role in national commemoration of the Holocaust or other genocides has not been determined . 
orders OF THE DAY 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
third Reading - Debate Suspended 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , Bill C - 4 is , on the surface , an innocuous , even delightful bill inviting enthusiastic , bipartisan support . 
it is a law to implement the international agreements Canada made for cooperation on the space station . 
thus , all could not fail but support the underlying principle of the bill . 
it passed quickly through the other place after several hours of debate and review by the committee there . 
i , too , support the principle of the bill . 
sometimes , however , God or the devil lurks in the detail . 
when the bill came to the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs for quick review and approval , I glanced at the bill for the first time . 
before the committee hearings , I asked government officials why it was necessary to have parliamentary approval when the international improvements could be implemented by cabinet approval alone . 
why ? 
it is because the agreement envisages member states agreeing that each of their criminal laws would have extraterritorial jurisdiction to the space station , including flights to and from the space station . 
so , honourable senators , I turn to clause 11 proposing amendments to the Criminal Code and article 22 of the agreement to analyze the ramifications of this extraterritorial application of our law . 
i discovered member states included the European Union , the United States , as well as Canada , Japan and Russia , and that the extradition laws and criminal laws of each of those states would apply . 
honourable senators will recall the amendments I moved to Bill C - 40 , the Extradition Act , supported by my colleague Senator Joyal , to remove the Minister of Justice ' s discretion when it came to requests for extradition by states where the accused would be subject to the death penalty . 
capital punishment was abolished by Canada almost three decades ago . 
after a full debate , those amendments were defeated in the Senate . 
honourable senators will recall that the party whip was applied on this side . 
bill C - 4 resurrects the same issues as the defeated amendments of Bill C - 40 . 
the Minister of Justice still retains the discretion to decide whether or not to seek assurances from a state that retains capital punishment requesting , for example , extradition of an accused Canadian charged with murder . 
i pointed out the invidious position of the Minister of Justice deciding a question of life or death when Canada ' s law was clear - no capital punishment . 
this fearful discretion has been transported to outer space by Bill C - 4 . 
let me draw a simple proposition . 
a Canadian is charged with murder in the space station . 
a European is also charged with murder in the space station . 
canada and all members of the European Union have abolished capital punishment . 
the space station was launched from Texas , a state that retains capital punishment . 
the European could not be extradited to Texas unless Texas gave the member state in Europe assurances that the death penalty would not be applied . 
our Minister of Justice , however , would have the discretion to decide whether or not to extradite the Canadian , with or without assurance that the death penalty would apply . 
this issue , honourable senators , is now squarely before the Supreme Court of Canada in the Rafay and Burns case which we referenced in our debate in the Senate on Bill C - 40 . 
in that case , the Minister of Justice was prepared to extradite , to Texas , two 18 - year - old Canadian youths charged with capital offences without assurances that the death penalty would not be applied in that case . 
this , I believed , was contrary to section 7 of the Charter of Rights and some on the British Columbia Court of Appeal opined in agreement . 
the case is now on appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada , where it was argued on October 5 , 1999 . 
last week , at the Foreign Affairs Committee , we were told by officials that the Supreme Court , in a rather unusual order , has requested that the case be argued for a second time . 
hence , the question raised by our earlier amendment to Bill C - 40 , which was defeated in the Senate , is still before the Supreme Court of Canada , albeit on the narrow facts of that case . 
hence , my abstention at clause - by - clause stage in committee , and my intended abstention at the report stage and on third reading . 
why the abstention rather than another amendment ? 
we were told by officials , in effect , that it is the government ' s intention to introduce appropriate amendments if the Supreme Court so decides to inhibit the minister ' s discretion . 
clarity from the Supreme Court should be available shortly . 
yet , if the government still seems anxious to proceed , I accept the official undertaking to renovate this peculiar and inconsistent law once the Supreme Court of Canada opines . 
i abstain and await the Supreme Court ' s decision and , hopefully , future expeditious government action to remove this anachronistic and invidious discretion from the Minister of Justice . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , I wish to advise you of my grave concerns about Bill C - 4 which implements Canada ' s ratification of the international agreement creating the Civil International Space Station . 
i am indebted to my colleague Senator Grafstein for bringing this issue to my attention while I was attending to the Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee study of Bill S - 10 . 
bill C - 4 contains provisions , in clause 11 , which raise questions about the power of the Minister of Justice to authorize the extradition of Canadian citizens to states where the death penalty may be imposed . 
clause 11 of the bill amends section 7 of the Criminal Code by inserting new subsections which have the effect of extending the application of the Criminal Code to the international space station . 
the proposed new subsection of the Criminal Code , subsection ( 2.31 ) , 
reads in part as follows : 
the net result is that Canada ' s criminal jurisdiction is extended to the new international space station . 
moreover , the criminal jurisdiction is exercised in cooperation with 14 other countries under the international agreement governing the space station . 
consequently , the other 14 contracting states will have similar provisions under their penal law . 
in clause 11 , Bill C - 4 raises precisely the same substantive matter that was raised in clause 42 ( 2 ) of Bill C - 40 in the last session , namely , the discretion of the Minister of Justice to order an extradition where the death penalty applies . 
once again , there is no safeguard against the death penalty for persons extradited from Canada . 
as you will remember , I stated the fundamental principles supporting my position on the essential question of the death penalty in the spring of this year when the Senate dealt with Bill C - 40 , respecting extradition . 
during the third reading debate on that bill , I supported an amendment proposed by Senator Grafstein which would have required the Minister of Justice to secure an undertaking from the requesting state that the sentence of death would not be imposed or , if imposed , would not be carried out . 
rather , the death penalty would be changed to a mandatory life sentence without the possibility of parole . 
in my mind , leaving the discretion over life and death of any person in Canada to a minister of the Crown is fundamentally wrong and contrary to the provision of section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
these important questions are currently the subject of the Burns and Rafay case that was heard in the Supreme Court of Canada this year . 
this case , as you will remember , involves the decision of the Honourable Allan Rock , P . C . , to authorize the extradition of two 18 - year - old Canadian citizens to a state in the United States where they are charged with murder and may face the death penalty . 
in formulating his decision , Mr. Rock did not seek any assurance that the death penalty would not be sought by the prosecuting authority in that jurisdiction . 
the Supreme Court ruling has yet to be rendered , but the learned justices ordered a re - hearing in the case on October 25 , 1999 . 
in his testimony on Tuesday , December 7 , 1999 before the Foreign Affairs Committee , Mr. Yvan Roy , general counsel of the criminal law policy section in the Department of Justice , explained that the power of a Minister of Justice to authorize extradition would continue to be one of complete and unfettered discretion and is not qualified by Bill C - 4 . 
the statement made by Mr. Roy was : 
... the Minister of Justice , who is responsible for the application of the Extradition Act , may refuse to make a surrender order when the conduct in respect of which the request for extradition is made is the subject of criminal proceedings in Canada against that person . 
Mr. Roy also acknowledged that the court ruling in the Burns and Rafay case may create an obligation on the minister to demand assurances before authorizing extradition in such cases . 
he said . 
Mr. Chairman , you know that the matter actually is presently before the Supreme Court of Canada in Burns and Rafay . 
it may very well be that another section of this particular piece of legislation will have to be invoked , depending on what the Supreme Court of Canada will have to say if the death penalty were to be an option in the foreign state , again depending on what the Supreme Court of Canada says . 
according to current law , there is no such obligation , but that may become the law , depending on that judgment . 
honourable senators , given these circumstances , and taking into account the principles that I have already explained in detail on the public record in the Senate on the very issue of the death penalty last spring , I cannot in good conscience vote in favour of clause 11 of Bill C - 4 which gives effect to the agreement for shared criminal jurisdiction on the civil international space station . 
consequently , I wish to declare for the record that I intend to abstain from voting when the question is put for the third reading of Bill C - 4 . 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , I hereby give notice that I shall refrain from voting on Bill C - 4 for the same reasons as honourable senators Grafstein and Joyal . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I will not enter into the discussion Senators Grafstein and Joyal have raised . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
i would beg the indulgence of honourable senators . 
i notice that it is 3:29 p.m. and we had agreed that we would revert to the Notice of Inquiry of Senator Gauthier at this time in order to give him an opportunity to speak for 15 minutes . 
therefore , I would ask for leave to revert to the inquiry standing in the name of Senator Gauthier which deals with a report on the recent la Francophonie Summit . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators that leave be granted to proceed to Inquiry No. 1 ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Andreychuk : 
on a point of order , I would remind honourable senators that the Foreign Affairs Committee was given permission to meet at this time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , Honourable Senator Andreychuk , leave has been granted . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i would seek instruction . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is the honourable senator raising a point of order ? 
the Senate has authorized the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs to meet at 3:30 today . 
notwithstanding that , I intend to yield so that we may accommodate Senator Gauthier . 
is it the wish of the chamber that I speak to this order now , or that I speak to it later and attend the committee , of which I am a voting member ? 
i find myself dealing with this conundrum every Tuesday and Wednesday . 
senator Hays : 
honourable senators , I do not think that the chamber can help Senator Andreychuk . 
it is her choice . 
she is obviously free to attend the meeting , as the Senate has given the committee authority to meet while the Senate is sitting . 
i will undertake to ensure that Senator Andreychuk receives notice when we resume the debate on Bill C - 4 , which will be in approximately 15 minutes , so that , if she wishes , she may return and participate in the debate at that time . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i will ask one of my colleagues to adjourn the debate in my name if I am not here . 
senator Hays : 
since we hope to be able to deal with Bill C - 4 today , I would ask that Senator Andreychuk speak today . 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I am quite prepared to speak after Senator Andreychuk , if she is noted as being the last speaker on this order . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i will adjourn the debate in my name and deal with it tomorrow . 
senator Hays : 
i would prefer that we deal with it today . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I did not intend to speak at length on this matter . 
we had a substantial debate on the death penalty when we dealt with the Extradition Act . 
my position was clearly stated on the public record then , and I continue to hold the same position . 
i accepted that there was an urgent need for Canada to be part of the implementation of the space agency agreement . 
consequently , I believe that it would not be good public policy or parliamentary practice to await the Supreme Court decision . 
should the Supreme Court ruling require further legislation , we can deal with it at that time . 
presently , the law is clear . 
as I said , this issue was debated when we dealt with the Extradition Act . 
i have not changed my opinion on that issue . 
i want to thank both the Department of Justice and the committee for doing a good job in relation to clause 11 of Bill C - 4 . 
there was a problem in the English version , although I understand that the French version reads perfectly well . 
we are making Canadian criminal law and extending it to the space station . 
under the definition of " crew member of a Partner State " , crew members come under our jurisdiction for an act or omission that " is committed on , or in relation to , a flight element provided by Canada or damages a Canadian flight element " . 
there is no definition of " Canadian flight element " in the bill , and the Department of Justice conceded that while " flight element " is defined , " a flight element provided by Canada " is not necessarily the same as a " Canadian flight element " . 
while this seemed like quibbling to some , those who find themselves subject to criminal jurisdiction will find it to be more than that . 
we must be very clear . 
anyone who is charged with an offence under this legislation deserves to have precision in the law . 
i was pleased that the committee took my concerns under advisement . 
the department has indicated that in the next omnibus bill they will make the clarification and provide a precise definition so that no one who comes before our courts will be uncertain of his or her position . 
i thank the committee for that . 
it is extremely important , as we venture into space and create extraterritorial criminal law , that we be precise . 
i was pleased that the government and the Department of Justice accepted my point of view . 
i will support this legislation . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , to ensure that the record is accurate , the Senate had given leave to hear the Honourable Senator Gauthier . 
that inquiry was called . 
does any other honourable senator wish to speak ? 
business of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , when Senator Andreychuk rose to speak , Senator Gauthier agreed to speak after her intervention to accommodate her desire to attend the meeting of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
it is my understanding that there is agreement that Senator Gauthier now speak to Inquiry No. 1 , standing in his name on the Orders of the Day . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is very clear that our agreement is to interrupt the proceedings on the bill currently at third reading in order to hear Senator Gauthier speak to his inquiry . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted to proceed to Inquiries ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
la francophonie summit 
inquiry - Debate Adjourned 
leave having been given to proceed to Inquiries : 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier rose pursuant to notice of Wednesday , October 13 , 1999 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the recent Francophonie Summit , which was held in Moncton last September . 
the agenda at the summit held in Moncton , New Brunswick , in early September was a busy one to say the least . 
unfortunately , the media were quickly distracted from the agenda of the heads of state who were present , focussing instead on whether or not the presence of certain people at the summit was legitimate . 
as senators know , over the past two years , I have had the honour of chairing the Assembl é e parlementaire de la Francophonie . 
therefore , I am going to say a few words on the role of the APF at the summit , before dealing with the thorny issue of legitimacy and ability to represent , in the case of a head of state who is suspected of having violated certain rights which we in Canada consider to be fundamental and basic in any free and democratic society . 
as senators know , the Assembl é e parlementaire de la Francophonie is a valuable link between decision makers within the Francophonie and francophone populations , since the assembly has 47 sections in various francophone parliaments , states and communities , and 12 associated sections . 
in addition to its important interparliamentary analytical and cooperative work , the assembly takes part in the establishment and strengthening of democratic institutions and in election observation missions . 
at the Mauritius Summit held in October 1993 , after reaffirming the critical role of this parliamentary institution at the core of the representative democracy and the rule of law that the Summit is , the APF , which is the only parliamentary organization within the Francophonie , was recognized as the democratic link between governments and peoples within the Francophonie . 
it was therefore decided to recognize the APF as an Assembl é e consultative de la Francophonie , as was confirmed by the Charte de la Francophonie adopted in Hanoi in November 1997 , which also created the position of Secr é taire g é n é ral de la Francophonie held by Boutros Boutros - Ghali , former UN Secretary General . 
at its regular session in Abidjan in July 1998 , the Assembly decided to adopt the name Assembl é e parlementaire de la Francophonie , in the interests of consistency with the Charter . 
as an advisory assembly , the Assembl é e parlementaire de la Francophonie took part in the Moncton Summit , during which its new president , Nicolas Amougou Noma , first vice - president of Cameroon ' s General Assembly , spoke before the heads of state and government . 
in his address , Mr. Amougou Noma reaffirmed the APF ' s attachment to parliamentary democracy and the rule of law , and restated his opposition to any transfer of power through armed force . 
he recalled the stands taken by the APF against child soldiers and its support for the speedy establishment of the future international criminal court . 
the Assembl é e parlementaire de la Francophonie supports the decision taken at the Summit to create an observatory of democracy , which it has always thought was a good idea , and to which it intends to contribute its parliamentary expertise . 
the APF is also pleased at the favourable reception given its plan for the establishment of a parliament of young francophones , with which it wishes to be closely associated . 
it noted with great interest the Summit declarations having to do with linguistic diversity , which it has vigorously promoted . 
however , it has doubts about the continued increase in recent years in the number of members of the Francophonie , which is not to become a second United Nations or Commonwealth . 
in future , new memberships should be conditional on undertakings with respect to the use of French in international relations and in education . 
finally , the APF indicates that its membership encompasses only those parliamentary assemblies which are elected in strict adherence to the constitutional standards of their countries , and that it has suspended any members who ceased to respect that principle . 
it is therefore all the more entitled to denounce the campaign accusing the Francophonie of particular complacency toward dictatorial regimes . 
it expresses its conviction that ongoing actions are required in favour of day - to - day democracy , such as it is involved in at this time , missions to observe elections , training of elected representatives , forums and regularly held meetings to discuss how best to be a parliamentarian in a democratic country . 
in this connection , the media have made much of the presence of representatives from Rwanda and the Congo . 
by so doing , in my opinion , they have cast a shadow over the accomplishments of the Summit and have sullied this exercise so crucial to the vitality of the international Francophonie . 
i took the liberty of writing to Prime Minister Jean Chr é tien on this matter last August 24 . 
in his response to me on August 31 , the Prime Minister referred to Canada ' s desire , and I quote : 
- to respect its obligation to the Francophonie , that is to enable the representatives of all member states to meet in Canada for this Seventh Summit . 
this does not , however , in any way imply that we sanction the violations committed by certain governments or individuals which might take part . 
i understand the Prime Minister ' s position , but I believe it is high time for there to be a redefinition of the eligibility of certain leaders to take part in international meetings . 
moreover , Canada ' s Minister of Foreign Affairs , the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy , has acknowledged that Canada was , or would be , in favour of a right of humanitarian intervention . 
the principle of human safety and security taking precedence over any other activity , including the development of trade , is therefore acknowledged . 
i am on side with such a position . 
in my opinion , it is in the same vein as the one I expressed to the Prime Minister , which is that human rights must come before a good number of customs and practices relating to international relations . 
it is my personal belief that it will soon be possible to impose as the respect of human rights as a sine qua non condition for international representation by countries wishing to take part in an international conference . 
this would be a powerful means of showing the way to certain recalcitrant countries , just as trade embargoes and the severing of diplomatic ties do . 
i trust , honourable senators , that this recommendation for states wishing to take part in international organizations to be required in future to respect human rights at all times will be acted on . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , debate adjourned . 
civil International Space Station Agreement Implementation Bill 
third Reading 
leave having been given to revert to Government Business , Order No. 1 : 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Stollery for the third reading of Bill C - 4 , to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , does any other honourable senator wish to speak on the motion for third reading of Bill C - 4 ? 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators - 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if the Honourable Senator Stollery speaks now , his speech will have the effect of closing debate on third reading . 
senator Stollery : 
honourable senators , Canadians are among the largest users of space technology and live in one of the most connected nations in the world . 
the credit for this reality is based on a vision that seeks to open doors of opportunity for our industry , scientists , astronauts and , above all , the future generations of Canadians . 
seizing on the opportunities provided by Canada ' s partnership role in the international space station is the essence of Bill C - 4 . 
while this legislation sets out to ratify our contribution to this remarkable space venture , Bill C - 4 is one small step for Canada in a project that represents a giant leap for humanity . 
it is only normal that a project of such scope and grandeur would require the definition of a very elaborate management regime . 
the parties to the agreement - namely Canada , the U.S. , Russia , Japan and 11 European nations - have undertaken to establish a framework for mutual international cooperation in relation to the detail , design , development , operation and utilization of a permanently inhabited Civil International Space Station for peaceful purposes . 
the agreement provides for mechanisms and arrangements to ensure the fulfilment of these objectives . 
legally speaking , Bill C - 4 implements our commitments under the intergovernmental MOU by bringing Canadian legislation in line with this agreement . 
more important , Bill C - 4 extends the application of Canada ' s Criminal Code to Canadians on board the space station and , in exceptional circumstances , to foreign nationals . 
this is similar in principle to the other extraterritorial applications of the Criminal Code , for example , on high - sea oil drilling platforms . 
moreover , Bill C - 4 also ensures that information essential to meeting our space station commitments is available to the Canadian government and that any information provided to meet those commitments is used exclusively for that purpose . 
i should like to take a moment now to thank my colleagues , in particular the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs , for taking an active , earnest interest in the bill and the ISS program . 
as chairman of the committee , it was encouraging to witness the attention the members gave to this important milestone for Canada in space . 
certain issues related to codes of conduct , jurisdiction and extraterritorial application were just a few of the points raised and debated during the committee hearings . 
i am pleased to report that the senators ' diligent and efficient treatment of the bill has brought us one step closer to its historic passage . 
ratification will clear the path for Canada , and ultimately for all space station partners , and open a new era of space exploration - the operation and utilization of the world ' s largest permanently inhabited laboratory in space . 
as we look to the next century , Canada is a world leader in space technology , poised to reap the opportunities of the knowledge - based economy that is Canada ' s future . 
Canadians will feel a deep sense of national pride as they watch , " live from space , " Canadian astronauts taking part in the building of this milestone in human endeavour . 
there is no doubt that as we stand at the threshold of a new millennium , we also stand on the threshold of further exploration of our universe , important scientific discoveries and innovative technological advances . 
the most important discoveries of the next 25 to 50 years are likely to be those of which we here today cannot even conceive . 
let us imagine 100 years ago how people were reflecting on the achievements of scientific discovery over the past 100 years , as we are doing today . 
revolutionary theories of matter , evolution and thermodynamics of the 1800 s must have seemed astounding in terms of progress . 
the road to progress , however , was , and remains , scattered with skeptics whose imagination falls far short of the rapid rate of change in science and technology . 
let me quote some of the great , and now humorous , testaments of years ago . 
Charles H . Duell , head of the U.S. Office of Patents , observed in 1899 that " everything that can be invented has already been invented . " 
in 1943 , Thomas Watson , chairman of IBM , was quoted as saying that there is a world market for maybe five computers . 
it is no wonder that in 1949 an edition of Popular Mechanics forecast that computers in the future may weigh no more than 1.5 tonnes . 
in addition , a Western Union internal memo once stated that the telephone had too many shortcomings to be seriously considered as a means of communication . 
would Bell ever have imagined the ways in which telephone lines have transformed our society and how they are now being used to transmit multiple parties and accompanying video images ? 
estimates predict that between 270 and 350 telecommunications satellites will be launched by 2007 to support an expanding global information infrastructure , with revenues doubling by 2005 . 
bell ' s " electrical speech machine " paved the way for today ' s information superhighway . 
who would have imagined that an on - line electronic industry , or e - commerce , would grow , from late 1993 to late 1995 , from nothing to something as important as steel and automobiles were in their days . 
our medical community , supported through space , science and technology , is working at completely eradicating certain ailments and finding solutions to others . 
our scientific community , among whom Canadian space scientists are the leaders , are contributing to our understanding of the universe and the effects of global warming on our atmosphere . 
our industrial community , with the Canadian space industry generating annual revenues over $ 1.4 billion , is generating jobs , wealth and expertise for an ever - increasing global market . 
behind each and every discovery and innovation is a history of courage to take risks and the perseverance to succeed . 
yet , despite the setbacks , each milestone must be perceived as part of humanity ' s intrinsic need to explore and understand the unknown . 
over the next 50 years , there is no way of telling which small stone overturned , even a stone on the surface of Mars , will lead to a whole new world of science . 
Alexander Graham Bell once said : 
when one door closes another door opens ; but we so often look so long & so regretfully upon the closed door , that we do not see the ones which open for us . 
the Civil International Space Station is but one such door that is open to Canada . 
it secures a place for Canada as a key partner in the most adventurous space venture ever undertaken in history , while ensuring that Canadian scientists , astronauts , experiments and technology get on board . 
the most notable long - term investment in these partnerships is the creation of opportunities that instill in our youth a recognition and motivation that they , too , can play a role in the breakthroughs of the new millennium . 
it is therefore with great pride that I invite honourable senators to support this milestone for all Canadians and humanity in the fields of space exploration and technological innovation . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading - Debate Adjourned 
honourable senators , I am pleased to address Bill S - 3 , the Income Tax Conventions Implementation Act , 1999 , at third reading . 
this bill amends the tax convention between Canada and Japan , implements new conventions with Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan and Jordan , and replaces the existing convention between Canada and Luxembourg . 
the tax conventions in the bill are of particular importance to Canadian businesses and individuals who do business and invest in those countries . 
allow me to set the bill in context . 
tax conventions have two main objectives : to avoid double taxation and to prevent fiscal evasion . 
this means of course that tax conventions have a significant impact on two priorities for a state : the promotion of trade and investments , and tax fairness . 
tax conventions relate directly to the international trade of goods and services , and they have a concrete impact on domestic economy . 
need I remind the honourable senators that Canada ' s exports currently account for over 40 per cent of our annual GDP ? 
moreover , tax conventions contribute to the fairness of the tax system by ensuring that Canadians are not subject to double taxation , a situation that may arise when a taxpayer lives in a country but earns an income in another country . 
without a tax convention , both countries could tax this income . 
one possible solutions to this problem would be for the country of residence to exempt this income from taxation or to give a tax credit under a tax convention for the tax paid to the country where the income was earned . 
the countries concerned may also agree to reduce the withholding tax rate . 
indeed , countries usually withhold taxes on income paid to non residents . 
in the absence of a tax convention or other form of legal exemption , the withholding tax rate in Canada for non residents is 25 per cent . 
the tax conventions covered by Bill S - 3 provide for the reduction in the withholding tax on dividends , interests and royalties paid to Canadians operating in the countries concerned . 
i will give some clarifications , if I may . 
the maximum withholding tax on dividends received from companies holding at least 10 per cent of voting shares in the company paying the dividends will be 5 per cent under the terms of the conventions with Luxembourg , Lebanon and Uzbekistan , and 10 per cent under the one with Bulgaria and Jordan . 
under our convention with Portugal , a company must hold at least 25 per cent of voting shares in order to be subject to the maximum 10 per cent tax rate on dividends . 
the conventions with Algeria and Kyrgyzstan set the withholding tax at 15 per cent for all dividends . 
with respect to interests , the minimum withholding tax rate is 10 per cent under the conventions with Bulgaria , Luxembourg , Jordan , Uzbekistan , Lebanon and Portugal , and 15 per cent under the ones with Algeria and Kyrgyzstan . 
there are certain exemptions , for example in connection with certain types of government loans . 
a maximum 10 percent withholding tax will be applied to royalties under the terms of our conventions with Bulgaria , Luxembourg , Jordan , Uzbekistan , Kyrgyzstan and Portugal . 
the maximum for Algeria , again in relation to royalties , will be 15 per cent . 
as well , certain conventions contain a provision for exemption or a maximum of 5 per cent on royalties relating to copyright , software , patents and know - how . 
the protocol with Japan reduces the maximum rates applicable to dividends between companies to 5 per cent , and exempts from Japanese enterprise tax Canadian enterprises operating ships or aircraft in international traffic , a courtesy measure already allowed by Canadian provinces to Japanese companies carrying out similar activities in Canada . 
another important component of Bill S - 3 is the rules being considered regarding the taxation of gains made by emigrants before their departure . 
since most conventions signed by Canada , including those with Uzbekistan , Bulgaria , Algeria and Kyrgyzstan , were negotiated before these rules were announced , a provision was added to the proposed rules governing the migration of taxpayers , which would enable Canada to unilaterally grant a foreign tax credit to emigrants , until the year 2007 . 
this eliminates any risk of double taxation on gains made before an emigrant ' s departure , until these conventions are renegotiated so as to comply with the new rules . 
the same provision applies to Japan , which asked that the issue be reviewed at the upcoming negotiations . 
finally , I would like to address the concerns expressed by some honourable senators regarding the tax convention concluded with Uzbekistan , in light of practices affecting human rights in that country . 
these values are reflected in our democratic institutions and practices , in the federal and provincial human rights commissions , in the Charter of Rights and Freedoms , and in our traditions of peace , order and good government . 
canada ' s approach to human rights since 1986 , regardless of the changes in government , has been based on commitment and dialogue . 
canada feels that the establishment of a multi - level dialogue with those countries that give us concerns about how they treat human rights is an effective way of promoting transparency , respect for human rights and compliance with the rule of law . 
our policy is based mainly on pragmatism and principles that guide us when defining concrete measures to bring about positive and real changes in a given country . 
of course , the measures we take vary according to the country concerned , its willingness to discuss human rights issues with Canada , the extent of our influence in the country or the region , the number and strength of NGOs working in the country to promote human rights , and a whole range of other factors . 
in the case of Uzbekistan , at the bilateral or multilateral level , Canada is urging this country to engage in economic and democratic reforms , and to better respect human rights . 
on the multilateral level , in 1994 and 1995 , Uzbekistan ratified six important United Nations treaties on human rights , which allows Canada and other United Nations member states to check whether Uzbekistan meets its obligations under these treaties . 
moreover , Uzbekistan signed the Helsinki Final Act , making it a member of the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe . 
canada supports the OSCE monitoring and democratization programs in that country . 
as such , CIDA sponsored the participation of representatives of Uzbek human rights organizations to a major OSCE conference on this topic held in Warsaw in 1998 . 
in addition , the Canadian International Development Agency supports a number of Uzbek projects in the area of human rights , including the preparation and distribution of a brochure on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , by the Uzbek national human rights centre . 
as a result of the breaking up of the Soviet Union , it had to negotiate new agreements with states such as Uzbekistan , which are not among the succession states bound by the double taxation agreement entered into with the former Soviet Union . 
in 1995 , Canada undertook negotiations prompted by the interest shown by Canadian companies in this market , particularly in the natural resource sector . 
Uzbekistan is one of the world ' s biggest gold producing countries . 
although exchanges with Uzbekistan have been modest so far , Canadian companies continue to show an interest in such sectors as mining , telecommunications and , just recently , education , in particular the creation of commercial schools in the country , and educational system reform . 
the negotiation of a double taxation convention with Uzbekistan is in keeping with Canada ' s desire to facilitate the transition from a command economy to a market economy , and to promote the democratic development of the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union . 
legal instruments such as the double taxation convention foster transparency , predictability and respect of the primacy of law in our bilateral economic relations . 
honourable senators , Canada will continue to engage in dialogue with Uzbekistan so as to encourage this country to improve its practices in terms of democratic development , respect of human rights , and economic reform . 
it is hard to penetrate the markets of the former Soviet Union and much advance preparation is required . 
the legal instruments this requires , such as the double taxation convention , consist in framework agreements to protect the interests of Canadians and Canadian businesses . 
when Canadians choose to expand their activities into difficult markets such as Uzbekistan , the advantage of such instruments is that they clarify the rules and make forecasting easier . 
i will address two other points before I close . 
first of all , honourable senators , when the provisions of a tax convention differ from those in the Income Tax Act , the tax convention takes precedence so as to guarantee that the objectives I have referred to will be met . 
honourable senators , elimination of double taxation on commercial operations involving the countries addressed by this bill can only benefit Canadian businessmen and investors doing business in these countries , and will do much to foster harmonious international relations and profitable commercial exchanges . 
canada currently has tax conventions with 67 countries . 
that number will climb to 74 once the conventions in this bill have been implemented , thus promoting Canada ' s goal to expand its network of international tax conventions . 
honourable senators , I urge you to give quick passage to this legislation . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Andreychuk is interested in speaking to this bill as well , but she has had to go to the meeting of the Standing Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs . 
i move the adjournment of the debate in her name , and I am sure she will speak to it tomorrow . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , since it is late in the year , could I ask Senator Kinsella whether there are other speakers on the opposition side who wish to speak to the order in addition to Senator Andreychuk ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i believe we are the only two senators who wish to speak . 
on motion of Senator Kinsella , for Senator Andreychuk , debate adjourned . 
speech from the Throne 
motion for Address in Reply Adopted 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kroft , seconded by the Honourable Senator Furey , for an Address to Her Excellency the Governor General in reply to her Speech from the Throne at the Opening of the Second Session of the Thirty - sixth Parliament . - ( 
8 th day of resuming debate ) . 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , I am pleased to participate in the debate on the Speech from the Throne , although I must say I agree with most observers and commentators that the Throne Speech was particularly devoid of vision and lacked any meaningful direction on the part of the government . 
i have only one thing to say with respect to that : 
that brings me to the subject of my speech : the unchallenged claim of economic management by the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister in waiting . 
the PMO ' s summary of the Throne Speech stated : 
we have ended an era of skyrocketing deficits and public debt - for good . 
we have brought down back - to - back balanced budgets for the first time since 1951 - 52 . 
we have put the debt - to - GDP ratio on a permanent downward track . 
the government ' s spinmeisters and propagandists consistently and successfully it seems , because they are unchallenged , would have Canadians believe that the former government was responsible for this state of affairs . 
they have played fast and loose with the truth . 
i am well aware , honourable senators , that the only words to describe this tactic would be considered unparliamentary . 
what we have is a government which misrepresented every single initiative of the former Progressive Conservative government of Brian Mulroney - on free trade , on GST , on privatization and deregulation , on the Pearson airport development , and on the purchase of helicopters , to name but a few . 
why , then , when they have this unblemished record of reversal of policies , are they allowed to get away with the claim that they " inherited a mess " , to use the Prime Minister ' s own words ? 
what are the facts ? 
honourable senators , in the fall of 1993 , the deficit stood at $ 37.5 billion . 
the Liberals came to power in November , 1993 , and quickly went to work piling every conceivable expenditure onto that figure to raise it to as high a level as possible before the end of the 1993 - 94 fiscal year which ended in March , 1994 . They had five months to do their handiwork . 
they were throwing around the speculative figure of $ 44 billion to $ 46 billion shortly after coming to office , hoping it would stick in the public mind - and it did , unfortunately . 
after a great deal of effort , they did get the deficit number up to $ 42 billion . 
their aim was clear , and that was to get the number higher than the $ 38 billion which was the deficit when the Progressive Conservative government was formed in 1984 . 
how did they do this ? 
they added expenditures to the books that were , in fact , expenditures intended for future years . 
in fact , honourable senators , three of the above - mentioned figures were not paid out as of March 31 , 1993 , even though they were put on the books for 1993 - 94 . 
the Auditor General objected to this practice but the government did not care . 
they needed a certain figure for their own political propaganda purposes . 
they were prepared to take a day or two of potential negative news reports in order to meet their political agenda . 
why would they not ? 
they faced virtually no opposition in Parliament , and they were supported at the time by a compliant and , in many cases , a fawning media . 
the opposition parties , the Bloc and Reform , were more interested in destroying the Progressive Conservative Party than in holding the government accountable . 
thus the Liberal government perpetuated a myth which they spun into reality and which they continue to recite , like the trained seals they are , to this very day . 
because of their known record of misrepresentation in all other areas , it is surprising that they have not been challenged on this as well . 
they get high marks in spinning a story . 
i suppose , if you are a Liberal , this is terrific . 
it suits their purpose to perpetuate this myth . 
since fairness has never been a strong suit for them or their apologists - all is fair in love , war and politics , as the saying goes - let us accept that as an unfortunate reality , which , by the way , only contributes to the low opinion about politics and politicians in the public . 
let us approach this another way , honourable senators , and that is by bluntly pointing out that there is a wrong to be righted here , and hope that this filters through to all of those who observe the political scene . 
i intend to do just that : set the record straight . 
the situation the new Progressive Conservative government inherited in 1984 was bleak . 
Ontario Liberal leader David Petersen said at the time , " Brian Mulroney has just inherited one helluva mess . " 
outgoing Liberal deputy prime minister and secretary of state for external affairs , Jean Chr é tien , said , with uncharacteristic honesty which he has not since displayed , " We left the cupboard bare . " 
just this past October , Michael Bliss , in a column on Mr. Trudeau entitled , " Trudeau at 80 - A Tattered Legacy " , stated : 
the Trudeau government ' s failures in economic policy were so complete that even their ruins have disappeared . 
who but political archaeologists remembers the Foreign Investment Review Agency , the terms of the national energy program , the wage and price controls ? 
who cares ? 
he continued : 
even as Pierre Trudeau held office , the bankruptcy of Liberal attempts at state moulding of the Canadian economy had become palpable . 
socialist - derived notions of planning , collectivism and progress through public ownership collapsed in Canada and around the world , as did socialism itself . 
all that remained of Liberal economics in the Trudeau years was a stinking mountain of debt and an oppressive taxation regimen . 
the Chr é tien government has tried to turn away entirely from this aspect of Mr. Trudeau ' s legacy . 
honourable senators , the fact is that government intervention in the economy and our lives was at its height . 
government regulation and red tape was the flavour of the day , and government spending was at record highs . 
we had double - digit inflation and debilitating policies like the NEP and FIRA . 
the Auditor General of the day correctly reported that the Government of Canada and Parliament had " lost control of the public purse . " 
program spending had increased by over 14 per centper year every year for 15 years . 
the federal deficit had gone from almost zero to $ 38 billion dollars , and the federal debt had increased by more than 1,000 per cent , with some of the biggest increases coming when Jean Chr é tien served as Minister of Finance . 
as a new government in 1984 , we had the onerous task of changing both attitudes and realities . 
we were determined to take this on . 
we believed that we owed it to Canadians who elected our new government . 
as a university study noted : 
the long term consequences - 
- of the Trudeau economic policies - 
- runaway inflation , a free falling dollar , sky high interest rates and worsening unemployment - presented Prime Minister Mulroney with serious problems that took a long time to resolve . 
there was no doubt that Canada had to alter course , and fundamental policy changes would have to be embarked upon . 
what was done ? 
in effect , excluding debt servicing and costs , by 1990 the Government of Canada was being run in the black . 
what about the deficit that we keep hearing about in the other place and in the public arena ? 
the truth is , as any observer of financial reporting knows , that the only true measure of deficit reporting is as a percentage of the GDP . 
even the infamous Red Book conceded that . 
it cited the standard used by member states in the European Community in holding to the Maastricht Treaty of maintaining a deficit goal of 3 per cent of GDP . 
what are the facts ? 
as a percentage of the GDP , the federal deficit was virtually cut in half by the former government - from 8.7 per cent in 1984 to 4.6 per cent in 1990 - 1991 . 
then we were hit by a worldwide recession which adversely affected the number , bringing it back up to 5.8 per cent for 1993 - 94 . 
even with the recession , the deficit was almost 3 per cent lower when we left office than when we came in , even with the Liberal add - ons that they did in the last five months of the fiscal year . 
the undeniable fact is that public finances were left in a position sufficiently stronger in 1993 than we found them in 1984 . 
as a Privy Council analysis noted , and it is interesting that this analysis was written by a member of this chamber who happens to be on the other side now : 
... all deficits and increases in the national debt were attributable to interest on the debt that existed before - 
- our - 
- government came to office . 
what other measures did our government initiate that contributed to our present economic health ? 
the Foreign Investment Review Agency , which drove away foreign capital , was abolished . 
in the energy sector , for example , the National Energy Program , which siphoned billions of dollars from the Alberta economy and devastated the oil industry , was abolished , along with the Petroleum and Gas Revenue Tax , the PGRT . 
the government privatized or dissolved 39 Crown corporations and other similar holdings . 
as well , legislation was passed and administrative steps were completed for the elimination or consolidation of 41 agencies , boards and commissions . 
this , along with operational efficiencies , resulted in 90,000 jobs being removed from the federal payroll . 
from Teleglobe to Air Canada to Canadair and Petro - Canada , new private sector companies emerged to successfully compete and expand in a challenging international marketplace . 
Canadair and de Havilland were black holes into which money was thrown when they were sold to Bombardier . 
today Canadair is a success story in the aviation industry , with sales of the Challenger 604 , regional aircraft and the Global Express . 
free trade with the United States and NAFTA were and are the centrepieces of our many achievements . 
the opposition , especially from the Liberals , was brutal . 
Mr. Mulroney was personally demonized and our patriotism was questioned . 
it is now clear that we chose the right course for Canada . 
who but the Liberals could embrace these policies while keeping a straight face ? 
it seems largely forgotten now that the Liberals ferociously opposed both the free trade agreement with the United States and the NAFTA , which included Mexico , only to swallow themselves whole when they came into government . 
in 1988 , the last year before implementation of the Canada - U.S. Free Trade Agreement , our merchandise exports to the United States totalled $ 101 billion . 
honourable senators , it took 120 years from Confederation for our exports to the United States to reach $ 100 billion . 
it took just 10 years under free trade to surpass $ 250 billion . 
among other calamities the Liberals said would occur under free trade was the loss of medicare , regional development and our cultural institutions . 
were it not for free trade , our economy might well have remained stagnant throughout the 1990 s . 
that is not to say that this was achieved without sacrifice and dislocation . 
as the Business Council on National Issues noted : 
export performance has been the brightest star in the Canadian galaxy . 
it is fair to say , without equivocation , that free trade is an outstanding success . 
who can ever forget the shenanigans here in this chamber ? 
as a matter of fact , one would be hard pressed to find an equivalent precedent in our entire history . 
in the 1993 election , the Liberals promised to abolish it and replace it . 
Canadians went to the polls in great numbers , believing this to be the case . 
six years later , it is still there . 
why ? 
the answer is obvious . 
it has proven to be what it is - an upfront , visible and socially progressive tax . 
it has also been beneficial to our economy , especially to our exports , and it has added significantly to the revenues of the government . 
the old 13.5 per cent Manufacturers Sales Tax , which we abolished , was a hidden tax and a hindrance to exports . 
the Canada - U.S. Free Trade Agreement , the NAFTA , the GST , privatization , deregulation , the abolition of the National Energy Program and the replacement of the Foreign Investment Review Agency by Investment Canada were all part of the restructuring and modernizing of the Canadian economy . 
on the fiscal side , deficit reduction and the downsizing of government began in 1984 , not 1994 , as some would have you believe . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator LeBreton , I regret having to interrupt you , but your time for speaking has expired . 
senator LeBreton : 
honourable senators , may I have leave to continue ? 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator LeBreton : 
all these courageous policies have two common characteristics . 
the Progressive Conservative government brought them in , and the Liberals fought and voted against every single one of them . 
by the time Mr. Mulroney ' s government left office inJune 1993 , employment in Canada was up 1.4 million jobs from the September 1984 level . 
the prime rate was at 6 per cent , the lowest in 20 years . 
our inflation rate was 1.5 per cent , the lowest in 30 years . 
the United Nations had just reported that in terms of quality of life , Canada was the number one nation in the world . 
most important , honourable senators , attitudes have changed . 
thanks to our efforts , Canadians were brought around to understanding the importance of deficit reduction , something they were not prepared to face a decade earlier . 
a few years ago , Professors Thomas Velk and A . R . Riggs of McGill University , co - directors of the North American Studies Program at McGill , analyzed the economic performance of Canada under all prime ministers since the Second World War . 
these economic experts compared results from unemployment , inflation , growth , interest rates , value of the dollar , distribution of income , deficit and tax rates . 
what was their conclusion ? 
i quote directly from their study . 
Mulroney ' s objective record - in terms of core performance statistics for the Canadian economy - is the best in the past 35 years . 
as I indicated at the beginning , all these undeniable facts have been lost in the turbulence of misinformation and the altering of the truth by the formidable propaganda machine known as the Liberal Party of Canada . 
liberal spin doctors and friendly lickspittles in the media are now telling the nation how this government courageously eliminated the deficit , turned the economy around and saved the nation . 
jean Chr é tien and Paul Martin have already ordered their halos . 
central to this thesis is their allegation that in 1993 the new Liberal government inherited an extremely bad economic and fiscal situation . 
in fact , in a TV debate during the 1997 election campaign , Mr. Chr é tien referred to the " disaster " he had inherited . 
perhaps Mr. Chr é tien was having another of his famous chats with the homeless . 
of course , he inherited no such thing . 
the groundwork had been laid for a strong export - driven recovery . 
our policies provoked deep structural change in Canada , from taxes to inflation to trade . 
they were unpopular but necessary . 
honourable senators , Canadians quite rightly should be happy with these results , but let us give credit , or at least some of it , to where credit is due . 
as former prime minister Brian Mulroney once said , Finance Ministers Michael Wilson and Don Mazankowski planted the garden and Paul Martin is picking the flowers . 
as a Canadian , I am pleased by that result and do not begrudge Mr. Martin any credit that comes his way . 
it is indeed a privilege for all of us who serve in Parliament to see hotly contested policies ultimately bring about beneficial results that strengthen the fibre of our nation . 
honourable senators , we told Canadians what they had to know - the truth they needed to know about free trade , NAFTA , the GST , deficit reduction , low inflation , Pearson airport , helicopter purchases , and we even believed in that old parliamentary tradition of ministerial responsibility and accountability . 
our economic policies were pilloried in many quarters , but we repeated over and over that if these policies were enacted and sustained over an extended period of time , Canada would be a nation transformed . 
the deficit would be eliminated , exports would boom , and the economic well - being of Canadians and their families would be enhanced in a non - inflationary climate . 
we did not promise perfection , just significant progress . 
i am extremely proud that I and honourable senators on this side were and are such a large component of that significant progress . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if the Honourable Senator Kroft speaks now , his speech will have the effect of closing debate on the motion . 
hon. Richard H . Kroft : 
senator Furey , in his Address in reply to the Speech from the Throne , brought his own perspective from the eastern edge of our country and from his personal experience . 
in the days since , many senators have participated in the debate and have brought to bear a great range of ideas and insights . 
it has been a debate in the best traditions of this place . 
in my address , I observed the following : 
it is the task of the government to listen carefully to all voices , to conduct its own studies and evaluations and , in the end , to determine a course of action . 
it is on that course of action and on the effectiveness of its execution that the government will be judged . 
more important , it is on the quality of those decisions and actions of government that the future well - being of Canada and individual Canadians will depend . 
honourable senators , the government has now heard the voices from this chamber and has the benefit of our guidance . 
with that , if there are no other speakers , I am pleased to move the motion standing in my name . 
motion agreed to , on division , and Address in reply to the Speech from the Throne adopted . 
on motion of the Honourable Senator Hays , ordered that the Address be engrossed and presented to Her Excellency the Governor General by the Honourable the Speaker . 
speech from the Throne 
address in Reply - Motion for Termination of Debate on Eighth Sitting Day - Order Withdrawn 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hays , seconded by the Honourable Senator Mercier : 
that the proceedings on the Order of the Day for resuming the debate on the motion for an Address in reply to Her Excellency the Governor General ' s Speech from the Throne addressed to both Houses of Parliament be concluded on the eighth sitting day on which the order is debated ; 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Kinsella , seconded by the Honourable Senator DeWare , that the motion be not now adopted but that it be amended by striking out the word " eighth " and substituting the word " fourteenth " . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to request leave that Motion No. 2 under Government Business be deleted from the Orders of the Day as it is no longer relevant . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , first we need the agreement of the mover of the amendment , as that is the motion presently before us . 
does the mover wish to withdraw the amendment ? 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Honourable Senator Kinsella has requested that his amendment be withdrawn . 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Honourable Senator Hays has requested that his motion be withdrawn . 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order withdrawn . 
public Service Whistle - blowing Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
fundamentally , Bill S - 13 is situated within the environment of public service values and ethics . 
the bill speaks to a contemporary , professional public service that we are fortunate to have here in Canada . 
indeed , it is my submission that the Public Service of Canada is second to none in the world . 
a report entitled " A Strong Foundation " examined public service values and ethics . 
this is the report of a task force established by the Clerk of the Privy Council a few years ago and chaired by the late John Tait , a former colleague and deputy minister of justice . 
the purpose of " A Strong Foundation " was to help the public service think about and , in some cases , rediscover and understand its basic values and recommit to and act on those values in all its work . 
i commend this publication to honourable senators for reading . 
some of the issues and problems identified as concerns of public servants of Canada include evolving conventions about accountability ; tension between old values and new ; ethical challenges emerging from new service and management approaches in the public service ; and leadership and people management in this time of great change . 
bill S - 13 attempts to cast the need to provide for a framework to deal with the matter of whistle - blowing within this new context of ethics and values as a strong foundation of our Canadian public service . 
the whistle - blowing framework of Bill S - 13 builds on the ethics regime which , frankly and happily , is growing within our public service . 
as indicated at page 54 of the Tait report , an ethics regime : 
further , at page 55 , we find the Tait report observing : 
one element of an ethics regime to which we wish to give particular importance is the establishment within public service organizations of suitable recourse mechanisms , counsellors , or ombudsmen for public servants who may feel that they or others are in potential conflicts of interest or other ethical difficulties , or may feel that they are under pressure or have been asked to perform actions that are unethical or contrary to public service values and to the public interest . 
one refrain that we have heard from public servants is that there is no point in asking them to uphold public service values or to maintain high ethical standards in public service , if we do not give them the tools to do so . 
one of the essential tools they require is some accessible person to whom they can turn , in confidence , to seek advice and guidance , to express concern about instructions given , or to report a serious breach of public service ethics . 
such a function must have sufficient seniority , independence and authority to carry out the duties effectively and to protect the identity and positions of those who have recourse to it . 
there must be means , consistent with public service values , for public servants to express concern about actions that are potentially illegal , unethical or inconsistent with public service values , and to have those concerns acted upon in a fair and impartial manner . 
honourable senators , Bill S - 13 is designed to build on this desire that is expressed by the public service itself , that is , to operate as a first - class service . 
the bill is built on a framework of four pillars . 
the first is to keep responsibility for an ethical and values - based management of departments and agencies at the unit level , whereby solutions to problems would involve the managers and , ultimately , the responsible minister at the departmental level . 
the second pillar speaks to the cross - service and public interest need . 
the third is the provision of a process to deal with individual cases of whistle - blowing , a process that operates on the public interest basis and removes from the shoulders of the individual public servant the strain and stress of dealing with wrongdoing and having it dealt with by one of the three commissioners of the Public Service Commission of Canada . 
the fourth pillar of the bill is protection for the whistle - blower . 
thus , there are in Bill S - 13 anti - retaliation provisions . 
honourable senators , the model is one which , first , protects the public interest in general ; second , enriches the public service as a first - class institution ; third , provides for accountability and solutions at the unit level ; and , fourth , protects the public servant . 
clause 2 ( a ) provides that we wish to place a focus on education , and that persons working in the public service workplace will have the opportunity to be exposed to a reflection on ethics and values in the public service . 
the second " P " is for process . 
clause 2 ( b ) provides for protection of the public interest by providing a means for employees of the public service to make allegations of wrongful acts or omissions in the workplace , and to make those allegations in confidence to an independent commissioner , one of the three commissioners of the Public Service Commission . 
it will then be on the shoulders of that commissioner , in the public interest , to investigate the allegations and to have the situation dealt with . 
finally , the third " P " is for protection . 
clause 2 ( c ) indicates that purpose of the bill is to protect employees of the public service from retaliation for having made or for proposing to make , in good faith , allegations of wrongdoing and submitting these allegations to this special commission . 
honourable senators will find the framework of the bill to be straightforward and clear . 
the public service itself has been working in this area of ethics and values . 
the record is pretty darn good in terms of the high level of professionalism that is manifested by our professional public service , serving successive and varying governments over the years . 
we should be proud of the Public Service of Canada . 
this issue of whistle - blowing is a reality with which other jurisdictions have attempted to deal . 
successive governments have indicated their interest in trying to provide for appropriate whistle - blowing legislation . 
the model that we are proposing in this bill which , hopefully , the appropriate Senate committee will invite representations on , is simply to designate one of the three commissioners of the Public Service Commission of Canada as a public interest commissioner to whom an individual public servant observing illegal activity or wrongdoing would take his or her case or allegation . 
the carriage of the case would be placed on the shoulders of the Public Interest Commissioner so that the individual public servant would not be left with that task , along with the anxiety and stress that it entails . 
it is in the public interest that we have no improper activity . 
that is why the bill envisages the investigation being done by a commissioner of the Public Service Commission itself . 
sometimes cases are frivolous or vexatious . 
Thosey would be dismissed at the first instance so that there would no waste of time of both the individual , and the department or the agency in question . 
those cases which are bona fide would be investigated , and the department would be visited by the commissioner . 
the department would then be invited to manage itself in such a way as to deal with issues of wrongdoing , because it is terribly important to keep the departments or the agencies themselves operating and managing on the basis of ethics and values which are the foundation of our public service . 
this is not a top - down kind of model . 
rather , it tries to keep the accountability and the responsibility at the operating level . 
however , should the Public Interest Commissioner who is dealing with a case of wrongdoing determine that he or she is not receiving satisfactory response at the agency or departmental level , he or she would be able to approach the minister , who is , ultimately , accountable , and the minister would attend to the rectification of the problem . 
at the same time as we have provided for this kind of mechanism , it is important that the promotional and the educational functions continue to be carried out by the Public Service Commission . 
finally , it was necessary to provide for protection of the statutory requirement for confidentiality . 
that must be maintained from the moment the individual public servant files a complaint with the commissioner , through to the prohibition of retaliatory actions from anyone who has filed a complaint with the commissioner . 
honourable senators , those are the principles of the bill . 
that is the framework it encompasses . 
i invite my colleagues to participate in this debate . 
on motion of Senator Finestone , debate adjourned . 
royal Assent Bill 
second Reading - Motion in Amendment - Speaker ' s Ruling 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton , seconded by the Honourable Senator Kinsella , for the second reading of Bill S - 7 , respecting the declaration of Royal Assent by the Governor General in the Queen ' s name to bills passed by the Houses of Parliament , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Cools , seconded by the Honourable Senator Sparrow , that the Bill be not now read a second time but be read a second time when its sponsor fulfils the condition required by the law of Parliament that is necessary and preliminary to the passage in Parliament of a private member ' s bill altering the Royal Prerogative , that preliminary condition being the signification of Her Majesty ' s Royal Consent to Parliament ' s consideration of Her Majesty ' s interests in Bill S - 7 ' s proposed limitation and alteration to the manner , form , and style of Her Majesty ' s Royal Assent in Canada , which is simultaneously an alteration to the constitution of the Senate . - ( 
speaker ' s Ruling ) 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , if it is agreeable , I am prepared to proceed with my ruling now . 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
on December 1 , during debate on the second reading of Bill S - 7 , respecting the declaration of Royal Assent by the Governor General in the Queen ' s name , Senator Cools proposed an amendment . 
this amendment would have the effect of postponing the second reading of the bill until its sponsor , Senator Lynch - Staunton , obtains the signification of Royal Consent . 
senator Cools maintained this was necessary , given that the bill , in her view , affects the Royal Prerogative . 
shortly thereafter , Senator Lynch - Staunton rose on a point of order to challenge the amendment . 
senator Carstairs and then Senator Kinsella spoke in support of Senator Lynch - Staunton ' s basic position . 
in reply to these objections , Senator Cools denied that her amendment sought to impose any limitation on anyone . 
in this instance , however , Senator Cools maintained that , since the bill would affect the Royal Prerogative by altering the sovereign ' s powers with respect to Royal Assent , some evidence must be provided that the Governor General or Her Majesty the Queen consent to the proposal contained in Bill S - 7 . 
as an example , Senator Cools cited debate that occurred in the United Kingdom in 1911 during consideration of the Parliament Act which provided authority for Parliament to adopt legislation bypassing the House of Lords . 
since this point of order was raised , I have studied the matter and I am now prepared to rule on it . 
let me begin by stating that , to my mind , there seem to be two distinct parts to this point of order . 
one , of course , has to do with the matter of the Royal Prerogative . 
the second relates to the kind of amendments that are permitted at second reading . 
i will begin with the second element first . 
second reading involves a decision of the Senate on the principle of the bill , whether the Senate accepts its basic intent or not . 
this focus on the bill ' s principle has led to a practice that limits the kind of amendments that can be moved at this stage . 
leaving aside the motion for the previous question , which is a superseding motion , there are basically two kinds of amendments that are permitted at second reading : the hoist amendment , and the reasoned amendment . 
the hoist amendment seeks to postpone the consideration of a bill by proposing that the bill be read " this day six ( or three ) months hence " . 
the form of the motion is well established ; it was developed in the British Parliament more than two centuries ago to circumvent the narrow meaning of the word " now " in the standard motion for second reading " That such and such a bill be now read a second time " . 
nowadays , it is more often used to prolong debate since it allows those who have already spoken on the main motion an opportunity to speak again . 
a reasoned amendment , on the other hand , provides the means to put on the record , in the form of a motion , a statement or explanation as to why a bill should not receive second reading . 
by practice , as is explained in the 6 th Edition of Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms at citation 670 , on page 200 , reasoned amendments fall into one of several categories . 
reasoned amendments must be declaratory of some principle adverse to the principles or policies contained in the bill or they may express opinions as to the circumstances connected with the introduction or prosecution of the bill , or otherwise oppose its progress . 
furthermore , citation 671 ( 3 ) , on page 201 , suggests that the reasoned amendment should not attach conditions to the second reading . 
the amendment that Senator Cools proposes on December 1 reads as follows : 
that Bill S - 7 be not now read a second time but be read a second time when the sponsor fulfils the condition required by the law of Parliament that is necessary and preliminary to the passage in Parliament of a private member ' s bill altering the Royal Prerogative , that preliminary condition being the signification of Her Majesty ' s Royal Consent to Parliament ' s consideration of Her Majesty ' s interests in Bill S - 7 ' s proposed limitation and alteration to the manner , form , and style of Her Majesty ' s Royal Assent in Canada , which is simultaneously an alteration to the Constitution of the Senate . 
accordingly , the motion in amendment is not in order and cannot be put as an amendment to the second reading of Bill S - 7 . 
this , however , does not settle the matter entirely . 
as I indicated earlier , there are two aspects to this point of order . 
as Senator Cools stated in her intervention , Royal Consent is required whenever a bill proposes to affect either the prerogative of the Crown , its hereditary revenues , personal property or interests . 
with respect to this case , there is no doubt that the only issue involved with Bill S - 7 is that of the Royal Prerogative . 
the bill contains no provisions relating to the personal property or interests of the Queen . 
the question to be answered then is whether a bill providing an alternative to the ceremony of Royal Assent touches upon a prerogative power of the Crown . 
in making the case , Senator Cools referred to comments made in the United Kingdom Parliament in 1911 . 
i am not altogether certain how useful this case is as a guide to the present circumstances . 
the remarks of Lord Lansdowne indicated the need to obtain Royal Consent for bills affecting the Royal Prerogative , but do not provide any indication as to the nature and extent of the Royal Prerogative , particularly with respect to Canada ' s constitutional practices . 
according to Beauchesne , the question of Royal Consent can be highly relevant to the final disposition of a bill . 
at paragraph 726 ( 2 ) on page 213 of the 6 th edition , it is stated that the omission of Royal Consent when it is required " renders the proceeding on the passage of a bill null and void . " 
as many honourable senators will know , this is not the first time that a Royal Assent bill has been debated in the Senate . 
in 1985 , the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders presented a report on the practice of Royal Assent that included a recommendation to draft a resolution for a joint Address to the Governor General seeking her approval to modify the Royal Assent ceremony . 
however , the report was never adopted by the Senate . 
in my research , I also noted that , when the British Parliament adopted a Royal Assent Act in 1967 , Royal Consent was signified in both the House of Lords and the House of Commons prior to its passage . 
in fact , Royal Consent was announced before second reading , as Senator Cools has suggested be done with Bill S - 7 . 
on this point , Beauchesne notes at paragraph 726 ( 2 ) that " Royal Consent is generally given at the earliest stage of debate . " 
in the next paragraph , Beauchesne goes on to explain , at paragraph 727 ( 1 ) that " consent may be given at any stage of a bill before final passage ; though in the House it is generally signified on the motion for second reading . " 
furthermore , it seems that the practice of signifying Royal Consent in Canada has almost never involved both the Senate and the House of Commons . 
in the numerous instances when the Royal Consent was sought and signified , I noted it was usually signified in the House of Commons and rarely in the Senate . 
indeed , I found only one instance where Royal Consent was signified in this chamber . 
it happened as long ago as 1951 , just prior to second reading of Bill 192 , to amend the Petition of Right Act . 
this Canadian practice of giving Royal Consent in the House of Commons was noted in the parliamentary authority , Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the Dominion of Canada , by Sir John Bourinot as long ago as 1884 , when the first edition appeared . 
indeed , an example dating from 1886 contained in the fourth edition of 1916 records an example of Royal Consent being signified to a Senate amendment to a Commons private bill in the House of Commons rather than the Senate . 
this then seems to be an accepted departure from what occurs in Westminster . 
the question is what to do in the present circumstances . 
as I have already explained , the issue cannot be addressed in the form of the reasoned amendment that Senator Cools proposed . 
perhaps it would have been more appropriate to raise the matter as a point of order rather than as an amendment to the second reading motion . 
nonetheless , even as a point of order , I have heard nothing that would compel me as Speaker to delay the debate on second reading of Bill S - 7 . 
royal Consent might be necessary ; yet , based on the Canadian precedents , it would appear that there is no binding requirement that Royal Consent be signified in this chamber . 
accordingly , I am prepared to rule that the amendment is out of order and that debate on the second reading of Bill S - 7 should be allowed to continue . 
i would suggest , however , that , if this bill receives second reading , the issue of Royal Consent be studied by the committee to which it is referred as part of its examination . 
on motion of Senator Poulin , debate adjourned . 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Grafstein , seconded by the Honourable Senator Callbeck , for the second reading of Bill S - 5 , to amend the Parliament of Canada Act ( Parliamentary Poet Laureate ) . - ( 
honourable Senator Kinsella ) 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise to make a few comments in the debate on the principle of Bill S - 5 , to amend the Parliament of Canada Act ( Parliamentary Poet Laureate ) . 
at the outset , honourable senators , I wish to indicate my support of the principle of the bill . 
i congratulate Senator Grafstein for bringing the matter before us . 
traditionally , in Great Britain , the poet laureate is the title conferred by the monarch on a poet whose duty it is to write commemorative odes and verse . 
it is an outgrowth of the medieval custom of having versifiers and minstrels in the King ' s retinue and of the later royal patronage of poets such as Chaucer and Spencer . 
Ben Jonson seems to have had what amounted to a laureateship from Charles I in 1617 , but the present title , adopted from the Greek and Roman custom of crowning with a wreath of laurel , was first given to John Dryden in 1670 . 
Dryden , by the way , honourable senators , was beaten up on one occasion by political opponents for writing a pamphlet they did not like - a dangerous time even for a poet . 
in recent years , the ceremonial duties of the position have largely been eliminated . 
Dryden ' s immediate successors were Thomas Shadwell , Nahum Tate , Nicholas Rowe , Laurence Eusden , Colley Cibber , William Whitehead , Thomas Warton , Henry Pye , and Robert Southey . 
most of these poets , honourable senators , the successors of Jonson and Dryden , were considered hacks and are now forgotten and read by no one . 
William Wordsworth , 1843 to 1850 , and Alfred , Lord Tennyson , 1850 to 1892 , were genuine and deserving candidates - although arguably none of their great works was written while they held the post of poet laureate . 
Alfred Austin , 1892 to 1913 , is forgotten , deservedly so in the minds of some students of English . 
John Masefield , 1930 to 1967 , was popular in his time but is now forgotten . 
Cecil Day - Lewis , 1968 to 1972 , wrote some fine poems that still live , but he is best known today as the father of the actor Daniel Day - Lewis . 
John Betjeman ' s - 1972 to 1984 - stocks have not recovered , but he was a good critic of architecture . 
Ted Hughes , 1984 - 1998 , may he rest in peace , was the best Poet Laureate since Tennyson . 
while he was not as good a poet as the great Victorian , he was probably a better Poet Laureate . 
Hughes became Poet Laureate only after Philip Larkin , considered by many to be Britain ' s best poet of the last 50 years , rejected it . 
though widely admired as a poet , Hughes was faulted to the point of ridicule for much of the verse he composed while holding the position . 
Hughes held the post for 14 years , until his death in October of 1998 . The job as Hughes knew it was a lifetime appointment underwritten by a case of sherry and £100 . 
i hope that we can do better than that , Senator Grafstein . 
Andrew Motion , the new Poet Laureate of Britain , was chosen by Prime Minister Tony Blair . 
motion was seen as the most conventional of the many mooted candidates , and his selection put to rest rumours alarming to traditionalists that Tony Blair , the modernity - minded Prime Minister , might bypass known writers in favour of a " people ' s poet . " 
sir Paul McCartney - yes , of the Beatles - was one name mentioned in that context . 
the Poet Laureate in Britain is still approved by the Queen but chosen from a short list by the Prime Minister . 
it is understood to necessitate writing verse about the royal family and on grand national and ceremonial occasions . 
where many poets mentioned as candidates for the post balked at this requirement , Motion had demonstrated his willingness by writing , unbidden , a poem about the death of the Princess of Wales . 
the Glasgow poet Carol Ann Duffy said that if she had been chosen Poet Laureate , she would refuse to celebrate in verse any royal events , such as the marriage of Prince Edward and Sophie Rhys - Jones . 
she told The Guardian : 
no self - respecting poet should have to . 
there are so many more interesting things to do with the job . 
could this be a dangerous ground , one might ask , in the Canadian context , given the diversity of our country ? 
one would wonder whether a Quebec poet like Gaston Miron , for example , would be happy about writing a poem for the House of Windsor . 
perhaps we could eliminate the necessity of writing poems about the state . 
i think it would be a step in the right direction . 
the committee might wish to examine that proposition . 
this is the route that the Americans have successfully chosen . 
when the last Poet Laureate died in Britain , numerous other poets let it be known that they did not want to be considered for the post at all . 
the reason was that most of them did not want to take the post of Poet Laureate because of this tradition of having to write poetry for the state . 
the late Irish poet Michael Hartnett once said that the " act of poetry is a rebel act . " 
the poet Paul Durcan became very close friends with Mary Robinson and composed a poem for her inauguration as President of Eire , but Paul is the exception rather than the rule . 
Seamus Heaney has spent a lifetime writing poems that do not acknowledge the state - for obvious reasons , of course . 
when a reporter at The New York Times called Craig Raine , an Oxford poet , to ask if he was interested in being the next British Poet Laureate , he exclaimed , " Oh God , no , " and hung up the phone . 
Andrew Motion , who had made it widely known that he would like the job , said that he saw the post as " an extremely complex and interesting challenge for a poet . " 
he has said : 
i think that I want to honour the traditional responsibilities , to write poems about royal occasions and so on , but I am also very keen to diversify the job , or at least make those poems part of the wider national issues that I also want to write about . 
he said he particularly wanted to promote poetry in schools . 
he vowed that he would not write poems that are " merely sycophantic or sentimental . " 
motion lives in Islington , the North London neighbourhood where Blair lived before moving to 10 Downing Street . 
he studied at Oxford and holds the creative writing professorship at the University of East Anglia in Norwich . 
he has published nine volumes of verse , written a well - regarded biography of Keats , and won the Whitbread Prize for his life of Larkin , a poet who declined the laureate position . 
though the post itself is not held in universally high esteem , the race to see who will get it stirs broad interest . 
the official odds are quoted at William Hill , Britain ' s biggest betting agency . 
besides Ms Duffy , candidates making it onto the agency ' s list included Seamus Heaney , Derek Walcott , Wendy Cope , Benjamin Zephaniah , James Fenton , Tom Paulin and Geoffrey Hill . 
in an editorial welcoming the choice of Motion , The Times of London called him : 
... a poet of quiet understanding , gentle humanity and lyric force . 
his is a very British body of work , bound by sea and salt flats , personal loss and the national past . 
honourable senators , I am mindful of the time , but I did want to point out that the position of Poet Consultant to the Library of Congress is the American counterpart . 
it was founded in 1938 as the Chair in Poetry , and then in 1984 it became the Consultant . 
poet Laureates of the United States include great writers like Robert Penn Warren , Richard Wilbur , Howard Nemerov , Mark Strand , Joseph Brodsky , Mona Van Duyn , Rita Dove , Robert Hass and Robert Pinsky . 
in 1984 , Robert Penn Warren was named the first Poet Consultant of the United States , an annual position chosen by the Library of Congress . 
the appointment is for a one - year term but is renewable . 
many , it is suggested , may tend to agree that Americans have had more success than the British with their Poet Laureate , primarily because they have made the position much more proactive . 
this I think might be a far better project than the poet being forced to compose verses for state occasions . 
honourable senators , in conclusion , I repeat that I think that Bill S - 5 is a good idea deserving of careful study . 
it would be helpful to consider whether the title " Poet Laureate " is the most appropriate one . 
the Americans , for example , call their laureate the " Poet Consultant to the Library of Congress . " 
some Canadian poets with whom I have consulted in preparing these notes suggested that less colonial and more sensitive or culturally neutral titles are " Poet in Residence at the Parliamentary Library " or " Parliamentary Poet in Residence at the National Library . " 
others find the language of Bill S - 5 to be from an older and somewhat outdated paradigm . 
the committee that studies this bill in detail may wish to reflect on this consideration . 
the committee would also need to consider the nature of the proposed selection committee . 
it may be helpful to have a poet on the committee . 
reference might also be made to poet organizations such as the League of Canadian Poets , the Writers Union of Canada , the Canadian Authors Association , the Regional Writers Association and others . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I wish to inform the Senate that I intend to make a contribution to the debate , but later . 
perhaps Senator Hays would like to adjourn the debate . 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
he said : 
honourable senators , I rise today to begin the second reading debate on Bill S - 8 , to amend the Immigration Act , introduced by my colleague from Western Canada Senator Ron Ghitter . 
one of the positive features about our rules in the Senate is the system established for the introduction and processing of senators ' public bills . 
when I served in the other place - and I know virtually the same rules apply now - in order for a private member ' s bill to be debated at second reading , it was required to progress through a number of filters . 
for a private member ' s bill to receive second reading and be referred to a committee for study is almost unheard of in the other place . 
this bill is concise , to the point and is an easy read . 
for those who are interested in the issue , I strongly urge them to get a copy of the bill . 
i am sure they already have done so . 
it is my hope that , after some debate at second reading , Bill S - 8 will be sent to committee for study . 
i believe it deserves the time spent on it if only to air out the problems inherent in our immigration and refugee system as presently structured . 
bill S - 8 will be familiar to those honourable senators who were in this place in the fall of 1987 . 
bill S - 8 is a re - enactment of Bill C - 84 , which passed through Parliament at that time . 
bill C - 84 ceased to have effect on July 1 , 1989 . 
bill S - 8 allows the Minister of Immigration to direct that a boat not enter the internal waters of Canada or the territorial sea of Canada and , where a boat has entered , to direct that boat to be escorted to the nearest port . 
these , of course , are boats that are bringing into Canada or are suspected of bringing into Canada persons in contravention of the Immigration Act or its regulations . 
if the boat is within the internal waters of Canada or within the three - mile limit and , again , the Minister of Immigration has reasonable grounds to believe that the boat is carrying persons wishing to enter Canada in contravention of the Immigration Act or its regulations , the minister may direct that such boat be escorted to the nearest port for disembarkation of those on board . 
this bill was introduced in its original form in 1987 as a reaction to two events . 
in 1986 and 1987 , two separate boatloads of people came to Canada . 
the first contained Tamils , who landed in Nova Scotia in 1986 . 
the second contained East Indians , who landed in Newfoundland in 1987 . 
now we are dealing with boatloads of people from China arriving on our West Coast , brought here by racketeers or human smugglers . 
honourable senators , I was in the other place when the predecessor to Bill S - 8 was passed and am aware of the arguments against its passage . 
those who opposed the passage of Bill C - 84 at the time said it was unworkable . 
i say we must find a way to make it work . 
whether it involves carrying out interviews on the boats at sea before they are turned around or by some other means , we must find a way . 
it is my belief that Canada must send a clear message to deter those who would profit in the smuggling of human cargo . 
as all honourable senators remember , the events of this past summer off the coast of British Columbia made Canadians angry because we felt the most open immigration and refugee system in the world was being abused . 
Canadians wanted the government to stand up and tell those racketeers who were bringing people to Canada in dilapidated boats that we would not tolerate such behaviour and such abuse of our laws . 
the government did nothing . 
it did not act to deter this behaviour , unfortunately . 
the Minister of Immigration announced two weeks ago that she will be introducing a new immigration bill in the other place early in the new year . 
a discussion of this bill , both in this chamber at second reading and in committee , will help us prepare for the new immigration bill . 
i look forward to hearing the continued debate on this bill and , hopefully , interventions by those senators who make their homes on either of Canada ' s coasts . 
honourable senators , this is an insult to those people who are waiting to enter our country as legal immigrants . 
we as Canadians can offer no greater gift to the world than citizenship in our country . 
the sovereignty of our nation basically lies in our ability to control our borders . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I move the adjournment of the debate . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , I understand the motion is to adjourn , but I question how we proceeded to this debate in the first place . 
the motion stands in the name of Senator Ghitter . 
we are on day 14 and another senator was the first to speak to the item . 
it is the absolute privilege of the senator who wishes to introduce an item of this nature to have the first go at it . 
i do not know if Senator St. Germain was speaking on behalf of Senator Ghitter . 
i suppose they talked with each other . 
was the honourable senator reading Senator Ghitter ' s speech ? 
is that what happened ? 
senator St. Germain : 
honourable senators , not at all . 
i was speaking on my own behalf . 
i discussed with Senator Ghitter that I would be speaking to this matter . 
he deferred to me , allowing me to be the first speaker at second reading . 
i took this opportunity to do so . 
if that contravenes the rules of this place , then I am sure that , as others have said , we are the masters of our own house , and can rectify the situation . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , to clarify , the Honourable Senator St. Germain rose to move the motion for Senator Ghitter . 
therefore , the situation is quite in order . 
senator St. Germain had the authority of Senator Ghitter to proceed in this manner . 
on motion of Senator Hays , debate adjourned . 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discussions on Private Sector Proposal to Purchase Airline - Report of Transport and Communications Committee on Study - Debate Adjourned 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications ( airline industry restructuring ) , presented in the Senate on December 9 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Bacon ) 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I should like to express my gratitude to the deputy chairman of the committee , Senator Forrestall , and to all senators who participated in the work of the committee . 
over the past two months , senators have listened carefully to the testimony of the various groups who appeared before us . 
we diligently questioned the witnesses who testified before the committee and seriously debated every aspect of the report . 
i believe we can be proud of the work we have accomplished . 
our report is balanced and reflects what the witnesses told us . 
members of the committee should take pride in the fact that they , at the end of the day , agreed to speak with one voice which , once again , reflects on the quality of the work done by the Senate . 
through these recommendations , the committee sought to protect the interests of Canadians throughout the country . 
the members of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications hope that these recommendations will ensure Canadians , both in the short and long term , effective , safe and affordable air services . 
we also insisted that sections 64 and 65 of the Canada Transportation Act be strengthened to guarantee that the dominant carrier will continue to provide the services currently being provided to Canadian communities . 
our recommendation on bilingualism , to the effect that all services provided to the public by the dominant carrier and its affiliates be governed by the Official Languages Act , also reflect our will to ensure that the essential services which Canadians should expect are indeed provided . 
like the Competition Bureau , the committee expressed concerns about the possible lack of competition in Canada ' s airline industry . 
this is why several of our recommendations reflect in part or in full suggestions made by the Competition Bureau . 
the committee recommends that the dominant owner carrier commit to surrendering sufficient slots in key locations to allow effective competition . 
the committee also recommends that the new regulatory framework for slots be established by Transport Canada so that they be surrendered if not used , and that enough slots be available for new entrants . 
with the aim of helping small carriers offer effective competition , the committee would ask that the government revise the computer reservation system regulations with a view to eliminating the features which work to the disadvantage of small carriers . 
the dominant owner should also be required to allow new entrants to purchase frequent flyer points at a reasonable cost . 
it should also be required to negotiate interline and code sharing agreements on reasonable terms with new entrants in the domestic market wanting such agreements . 
the committee discussed at length the possibility of allowing domestic competition from foreign - owned airlines . 
the committee rejected the notion of pure cabotage , but showed some interest in allowing modified sixth freedom rights . 
it thus recommends that the government negotiate with the United States to allow through ticketing from one point in Canada to another through a U.S. intermediate stop . 
the committee hopes the Canadian airline industry will flourish . 
that is why it has agreed in part with the argument of many who think it would be better to raise the limit on individual holdings of Air Canada voting shares . 
some people believe an increase in the concentration of common share ownership would improve financial performance . 
in such a large country , the airline industry is not a luxury , but a necessity . 
that is one of the reasons why we have decided the limit on individual holdings of voting shares should not be raised beyond 20 per cent . 
this limit will enable shareholders to better monitor the performance of management , while at the same time limiting the risk of a foreign takeover . 
also , increasing foreign ownership of Air Canada by more than 25 per cent could jeopardize Canadian control over our main national carrier . 
meanwhile , the committee is concerned about the employees that will be affected by the ongoing restructuring . 
we urge the government to pressure the dominant carrier to ensure that employees are treated fairly in terms of job security and severance conditions if it comes to that . 
special attention should be given to seniority lists . 
finally , the committee believes that , for the government to efficiently monitor the commitments that it would ask of the dominant carrier , the carrier should account for its operations through a public forum such as hearings held once a year by the Canada Transportation Agency , in cooperation with the Competition Bureau , and that the outcome of such hearings be referred to the House of Commons transport committee and the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications . 
honourable senators , I believe this is a good report . 
our goal was not to protect shareholders ' interests but to protect all Canadian consumers in all regions of the country . 
members of the committee had heated debates about a number of issues . 
however , in the end , we managed to produce a balanced report which is testimony to the quality of our work in the Senate . 
once again , it shows how our institution can play its role as an independent parliamentary institution . 
i salute every senator who attended our meetings and participated in our work . 
they made this report possible . 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , it gives me some pleasure to rise today to participate in the debate on the standing committee ' s report entitled , " Airline Restructuring in Canada . " 
it is hardly an accurate title . 
however , it does reflect work that must be done by either this chamber or the other chamber before very long . 
honourable senators , I wish to congratulate the chair of the committee , Senator Bacon , for the way in which she conducted both our public hearings and the sessions spent in drafting this report . 
it is not an easy task to deal with hearings and a report when the scene upon which you are reporting is continuously changing . 
that is exactly what happened as the committee continued with its work . 
she did an excellent job , and I congratulate her for it . 
this government has often been criticized for lack of action , dropping the ball , of not coming up with new ideas , of living on the accomplishment of previous governments and , with its recently tabled legislation on referendums , of creating crisis where none exists . 
seriously , however , absolutely nowhere has this lack of action or lack of anticipation of problems been more apparent than in the way that it has dealt with or , in reality , ignored the air transportation industry in Canada . 
the possibility of a dominant or monopoly carrier had been with us for some time . 
only when the so - called " crisis " seemed imminent did the government attempted to act . 
it acted by suspending the involvement of the one agency in Canada which really has a grasp of competition issues . 
i refer here , of course , to the Competition Bureau of Canada . 
the government suspended its involvement in the merger and subsequently in the takeover led by Onex , which failed to come to fruition . 
we must ask ourselves why it acted in this way . 
the response must be : 
we just simply do not know . 
what was the extraordinary disruption of the national transportation system that was imminent ? 
what evidence did the minister have ? 
we do not know . 
what is more important , not one single witness before us , although all were asked , provided an answer to any of those questions . 
that is , perhaps , why the committee concluded , as it did , that it was not fully convinced that the use of section 47 of the Canada Transportation Act was appropriate in this situation . 
honourable senators , we could have stopped there . 
we would have been ignoring the reality of the changing scene in the area , which was taking place while we met and continues to take place this very day . 
policy questions were put to the community by the minister and in our pursuit of an answer to the section 47 issue , we also received evidence on all of these policy matters . 
a personal goal of mine in all of this was to remind committee members that the commitment of the previous government , which continues under this government , was to deregulation and not to regulation . 
the public interest must be protected , but not through the return to a regulatory environment . 
our report reflects a conclusion that , for the most part , the Competition Bureau should be the agency involved in protecting the public interest in air travel in Canada . 
leave the Canadian Transportation Agency with the task of ensuring the safety of the new entries and new airlines , but leave the monopoly issues that require the protection of the travelling public to the Competition Bureau . 
this will involve moving from the National Transportation Agency to the Competition Bureau a section of that agency that is the repository of the expertise in this field , but it should be a competition - driven concern . 
honourable senators , my colleagues and myself were impressed with the work done in a short period by the Competition Bureau in this matter . 
in fact , its report formed a large basis of our report on the airline industry which is now before us . 
the suggestion to ensure competition made by the bureau is imaginative , demonstrating that it can react quickly to a situation . 
quick reaction is vitally necessary to an industry which requires the investment of billions of dollars in capital assets and requires immediacy in determining where the financial resources should be invested , and in what way . 
in the time available to the committee , it did a credible job . 
i will not go into the detail of the recommendations , as in many instances I would only be repeating what we have just heard from the chair . 
suffice it to say that we could have dealt in more detail with the divestiture of regional airlines by the monopoly carrier . 
this is a matter which the Competition Bureau should reflect upon in some depth , as it would be appropriate to require the divestiture of the regional airlines . 
here , I am talking about competition . 
canada is a vast country . 
some parts are only reachable by air at certain times of the year . 
we must ensure continued air access to remote parts of this country , no matter what the outcome of the present airline takeover discussions . 
of course , I include in the definition " remote " those areas of Canada with smaller populations such as the interior of British Columbia , the Atlantic provinces , and other areas . 
the committee also did not express , as strongly as I would have liked or certainly as strongly as Senator Roberge would have liked , its opposition to the Air Canada - Hamilton proposal . 
a monopoly carrier running a low - cost , no - frills airline out of a majority city in central Canada surely would doom any future competition from other airlines that may have plans or may have had plans to establish a similar service in that part or any other part of Canada . 
honourable senators , there is no point now in speculating on the curious role played in all of this by the Minister of Transport . 
it is sufficient to say that it was void of policy . 
the necessity of invoking section 47 of the CTA , when no evidence existed that we were able to gather , leaves history to deal with his role and his lack of leadership . 
what is important now , honourable senators , is that the Minister of Transport act to protect the interests of the travelling public in Canada from price gouging , from withdrawal of service and , above all , from a lowering of safety standards . 
he could do no better than to pay close attention and implement the recommendations contained in the report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications on airline restructuring . 
i thank you for your attention . 
i would ask that the adjournment of the debate stand in the name of Senator Johnson . 
on motion of Senator Forrestall , for Senator Johnson , debate adjourned . 
internal Economy , Budgets and Administration 
second Report of Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration ( budgetary situation pertaining to committees ) , presented in the Senate on December 9 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Rompkey , P . C . ) 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , I move the adoption of the report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
the Estimates , 1999 - 2000 
national Finance Committee Authorized to Study Estimates 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Murray , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Beaudoin : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance be empowered to examine and report upon the expenditures set out in the Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee present its report no later than March 31 , 2000 , 
and on the motion in amendment of the Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . ( Saint - Louis - de - Kent ) , seconded by the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , that the motion be amended by adding , after the words " Estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 " , the following : 
" with the exception of Fisheries and Oceans Votes 1 , 5 and 10 ; 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Fisheries be authorized to examine the expenditures set out in the Estimates for Fisheries and Oceans for the fiscal year ending March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee report no later than March 31 , 2000 . " . - ( 
honourable Senator Stollery ) 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Murray is not in the chamber . 
this order deals with his motion and the amendments moved by Senator Robichaud . 
we are , however , in a position to deal with this matter now . 
i would seek guidance from my counterpart as to whether we should deal with it in the absence of Senator Murray . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
we can proceed now . 
senator Hays : 
as I understand the arrangement , it was that Senator Robichaud would withdraw his amendment , with leave , so that Senator Murray ' s motion could be dealt with . 
senator Robichaud will move , at the first opportunity , presumably tomorrow , a motion that the subject matter of those Main Estimates be referred to the Fisheries Committee as they apply to the Department of Fisheries . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , if we proceed step by step , we will get to where we are heading . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am not quite sure what that means . 
is there a request to withdraw the motion in amendment ? 
motion in Amendment Withdrawn 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I wish to withdraw my motion to amend the motion by Senator Murray . 
hon. Roch Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I would like to express the view of the Standing Committee on National Finance on this matter . 
i am aware of the issue . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
just a minute . 
senator Bolduc : 
senator Murray is not present . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
the Honourable Senator Robichaud , P . C . , Saint - Louis - de - Kent , is requesting leave of the Senate to withdraw his motion in amendment . 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion in amendment withdrawn . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , we are now back to the motion by Senator Murray . 
i am prepared to hear from Senator Bolduc . 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I do not wish to take the place of Senator Murray , but I would like to point out that , except for a few exceptions in recent years , the general mandate of the Standing Committee on National Finance has always been to examine all budgetary forecasts , and that is as it should be . 
however , if a particular standing committee , such as the Standing Senate Committee on Agriculture and Forestry or another committee , wants to examine the estimates for the Department of Agriculture or whatever , there is no problem . 
but the mandate should not read " with the exception of " . 
the Standing Committee on National Finance does not necessarily examine all programs . 
it tries to examine federal public spending from the point of view of administrative policy in particular , so that its mandate cannot be limited . 
this is what Senator Murray would have argued . 
there has been a long - standing tradition . 
there is much wisdom in it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , shall we adjourn the main motion until the next sitting of the Senate ? 
senator Bolduc : 
honourable senators , I move that the debate be adjourned . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I think it is in order to put the question . 
in saying that , I listened to Senator Bolduc . 
when this order was called , I indicated that I believed that the matter of the moment could be resolved fairly easily by taking the steps that are being taken . 
as to the future , it may be a little more difficult . 
i certainly think we should try to accommodate the Department of National Finance and this is a way that can be done . 
if the Fisheries Committee examines the expenditures related to the Department of Fisheries and Oceans , that would also accommodate Senator Robichaud ' s request and will not interfere with what Senator Murray wants . 
that is not to say that we are setting a precedent in proceeding in this manner but , for now , it is an appropriate solution to the situation before us . 
we should proceed with the question . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
organization on Security and Cooperation in Europe - Eighth Annual Meeting of Parliamentary Assembly Held in St. Petersburg , Russia - Inquiry 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein rose pursuant to notice of November 30 , 1999 : 
that he will call the attention of the Senate to the report of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association to the Eighth Annual Session of the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly ( OSCE PA ) , held in St. Petersburg , Russia , from July 6 to 10 , 1999 . 
as we approach the new millennium , can one fairly measure briefly and calibrate concisely foreign policy in this last century ? 
what is the work of foreign policy ? 
it is to make the world a safer , more peaceful place . 
yet , war predominated foreign policy . 
this century started with such high hopes . 
one hundred years ago , in 1899 , from St. Petersburg , Czar Nicholas II of Russia issued a clarion call to the international community for a convention to set international arms limitations and create a new international tribunal to settle disputes between states by consensual arbitration . 
this he hoped would bring peace to this new century , after the 19 th century had been racked with war and left over 16 million dead . 
later that year , in 1899 , at the czar ' s urging , an international conference was convoked in The Hague . 
indeed , that landmark conference established international arms limitations especially banning aerial bombs , as well as an international court to arbitrate disputes between states on a consensual basis . 
Unhappily , less than one year later , in 1900 , this message of hope went unheeded . 
the race for military supremacy was on . 
Dreadnought construction , first by Germany and then by England , accelerated the naval arms race . 
early outbreaks of unrest in the Balkans lead to the Balkan Wars in 1912 and 1914 , then came the infamous Armenian Massacre . 
this in turn was followed by World War I and a new phrase in the lexicon of death : " World War " . 
in 1917 , the Russian Revolution erupted . 
while 1918 marked the end of World War I , the Polish - Russian War broke out , and the Irish troubles started its assent . 
two new words of hope were added to the lexicon of death after World War I by President Woodrow Wilson : " self - determination " . 
meanwhile , unrest in China percolated , leading to the Chinese Civil War throughout the 1930 s and 1940 s . 
inside the USSR in the 1930 s , while communist fellow travellers and others in the world looked on , massive purges of untold millions unfolded to sustain the Bolshevik party ' s monopoly of power . 
imitating communism , Nazism and fascism raised their bloody banners which animated the Ethiopian occupation in Africa . 
the League of Nations , with Canada ' s help , faltered and floundered . 
enter the Spanish War , and the clash of communism and fascism , leading to the threshold of the Second World War ; first in Europe and then in Asia . 
we remember the Holocaust . 
it remains beyond our imagination . 
we recall the horror of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
in 1945 , the planet appeared exhausted by the stench of war , but there was no pause in the slaughter . 
revolutions broke out on the East Asian , African , and South American continents in the 1940 s . 
the 1940 s became the first host of endless Middle East wars . 
the 1950 s brought us the Korean War and the acceleration of war in Indochina . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
senator Grafstein , I regret to interrupt you , but it is now six o ' clock . 
what is the wish of honourable senators ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
i move that Your Honour not see the clock . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Grafstein : 
at the end of the 1950 s , we witnessed the Cuban Revolution , smartly followed by the Chinese Cultural Revolution , the Vietnam War , the Cambodian massacres and the Angolan wars . 
in the 1960 s , the Irish troubles ignited yet again , having persisted for eight decades . 
the 1970 s continued with at least 37 war - like clashes around the globe . 
enter the 1980 s , with the Iran - Iraq War , where , by the way , over 1 million people , including boy soldiers , were killed . 
more people were killed in that war than in all of the wars in the Middle East since the beginning of the century , all over a few miles of sand . 
the 1980 s witnessed the Afghanistan War , the tribal wars in Somalia , the Iraq invasion of Kuwait which led to the Kuwait War , tribal warfare in Rwanda , Nigeria , along the Congo and in the Sudan , and the outbreak of civil war in Indonesia , East Timor , and South and Central America . 
honourable senators , this awesome catalogue of perpetual wars is not exhaustive . 
however , there was hope - the USSR empire disintegrated . 
then in came the wonderful 1990 s , this last decade , after the " Wall " came tumbling down . 
the sudden breakup of Yugoslavia , triggered by the Western - induced separation of Croatia , led smartly to the wars in Serbia , Bosnia and ultimately Kosovo , and with it the impotency of the United Nations . 
as we approach the millennium , it is estimated that there are still over 24 wars raging across the globe , mostly in Africa but some in Eurasia . 
does it not seem , looking back , that much of our lives in this century was celebrated by staccato intermezzos between wars ? 
where were we before the war ? 
what did we do between the wars ? 
what did we do during the Vietnam War , and so on ? 
our literature became obsessed with actions and reactions to wars . 
why , then , should we note the work of the OSCE and other bodies dedicated to democracy through peaceful means when we cannot help but look backward over this century , pockmarked as it is by death , all in the name of the state or in the defence of a faith ? 
in 1994 , Zbigniew Brezinski , the former security advisor to President Carter , estimated there were 164 million deaths of innocent victims and soldiers in this century . 
i have estimated that a closer number from these violent outbreaks could reach almost 200 million deaths in this century alone . 
every decade has seen an escalating increase in technological violence , in mindless death , dismemberment and wanton destruction . 
what then , honourable senators , are we to do ? 
what can we do ? 
has the human condition advanced in this century ? 
Tolstoy gave some early guidance . 
he once wrote that all we can hope for is to cut small clearings in the dark forest . 
this we have attempted to do at the OSCE since the Helsinki Accord some 30 years ago . 
in that accord , sanctity of state sovereignty was modified by sanctity of the individual . 
in a simply remarkable speech given recently by the Secretary - General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , he acknowledged the UN ' s culpability and that of its member states for passing resolutions holding out safe havens , as the UN did in 1995 in Srebrenica , following which the international community stood idly by watching the Serbian slaughter of over 7,000 innocent victims who , with belief and conviction in the words in the international community , raced headlong for protection under the blue and white flag of the United Nations only to be helplessly slaughtered while the TV cameras looked on . 
recently , we reviewed UN resolutions in East Timor , grandly encouraging independence , then noticed that the UN watched idly while one third of the population was slaughtered in the belief that the UN would stand by the words of their resolutions . 
did the resolutions of the United Nations exacerbate the East Timor killing field where over 200,000 people of that impoverished territory were killed by the state might of Indonesia ? 
imitation is the best compliment . 
the NATO action in Kosovo invited Russia to follow suit in Chechnya . 
what a shameful history . 
five million deaths in the 18 th century increased to 16 million deaths in the 19 th century , to at least 200 million deaths in the 20 th century . 
the late Cecil Augustus Wright , the dean of my law school , quoted Mr. Justice Felix Frankfurter at the opening of the University of Toronto Law School in 1967 . 
he said : 
fragile as reason is , and limited as the law is as the expression of the institutionalized medium of reason , that ' s all we have standing between us and the tyranny of mere will and the cruelty of unbridled , undisciplined feeling . 
yet , we have learned that even the rule of law is helpless and hopeless without the power to uphold it . 
that is the one miserable and paradoxical lesson of the 20 th century . 
honourable senators , should we not wish for the next millennium that the rule of law respecting the sanctity of the individual becomes the norm rather than the exception , supported by political will and political power ? 
yet optimism is thin gruel when the United States , the only superpower and the world leader of democracy , refuses to enter into an international agreement to pursue war criminals by an international tribunal , or a conventional arms agreement on mines , or even the ratification of a nuclear treaty . 
these were auspicious setbacks to world peace in the 1990 s . 
we can only despair and then regroup to see if we can invent , in the next millennium , a better century than that which we inherited and that which we squandered . 
honourable senators , Elie Wiesel , who , before it was popular , lifted the torch of memory in this barbaric century , recently published the second volume of his memoirs entitled And the Sea is Never Full . 
he reminds us that , in Genesis , when Adam fled after having tasted the forbidden fruit , the Lord called out , " Adam , where are you ? " 
if God is everywhere and " all knowing , " why would God have to ask where Adam stood ? 
we are told God knew where Adam was . 
god demanded that Adam confess where Adam stood in this world . 
where is your place in history ? 
what have you done with your life ? 
these questions each of us can only answer in our own way . 
we must question the work of each organization dedicated to peaceful reconciliation of disputes . 
i hope the answer we receive in the next century will be better than the last . 
may the next generation improve on our work . 
the threshold from this century is certainly not very high . 
is there a deeper truth we neglect on foreign policy ? 
perhaps in these two texts lies one answer to the riddle of barbarism buried within the human condition . 
professor Pagels illuminates the origins of the demonization of " others " first by a faith and then imitated by the secular state . 
we have only started to fathom the causes of evil harboured in the hearts of men and women . 
does evil lie more deeply etched and indelible within the psyche of those who hold power and yet remain silent , inert or , worse , disinterested in the barbarism committed against others before their very eyes ? 
is this the curious moral of the last millennium - seeing not doing - and the hope for the next millennium - words to match deeds ? 
is there not a surreal paradox in what I have advocated ? 
i argue that war brings death , yet I advocate more war to uphold peace , which brings me to the puzzle of my own conclusions for this century . 
last Sunday , Joseph Heller , the American author of Catch - 22 , died . 
one critic wrote : 
honourable senators , let me quote ever so briefly from the book Catch - 22 : 
" you mean there ' s a catch ? " 
" sure there ' s a catch , " Doc replied . 
" catch - 22 . 
anyone who wants to get out of combat duty isn ' t really crazy . " 
there was only one catch and that was Catch - 22 , which specified that a concern for one ' s own safety in the face of dangers that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind . 
Orr was crazy and could be grounded . 
all he had to do was ask ; and as soon as he did , he would no longer be crazy and would have to fly more missions . 
Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn ' t , but if he was sane he had to fly them . 
if he flew them he was crazy and didn ' t have to ; but if he didn ' t want to he was sane and he had to . 
Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause of Catch - 22 and let out a respectful whistle . 
" that ' s some catch , that Catch - 22 , " he observed . 
" it ' s the best there is , " Doc agreed . 
honourable senators , this is the best that I can render as we draw to a close of this century and this remarkable millennium . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , I declare the debate on this inquiry closed . 
Ontario 
Poulin , having given notice on Thursday , December 9 , 1999 : 
that she will call the attention of the Senate to the decision of the Government of Ontario not to adopt a recommendation to declare the City of Ottawa bilingual following its proposed restructuration . 
on Thursday , December 9 , I tabled a notice of inquiry . 
why did the Government of Ontario decide not to adopt the recommendation made by its advisor , Glen Shortliffe ? 
what message are we sending to the Canadians everywhere in the country ? 
what respect are we showing for the Canadian Constitution ? 
what kind of recognition are we offering to linguistic minorities in Ontario , in Quebec , in the Atlantic provinces , in the West and in the Far North ? 
what respect are we showing for Ottawa , home of the Parliament of Canada , for the federal public service , for the embassies around the world ? 
honourable senators , a good number of us would like to speak to the many questions raised by my inquiry , including Senator Jean - Robert Gauthier . 
honourable senators , lend Senator Gauthier your ears . 
his 40 years of dedication to the fundamental principle of respect for the history of our country and for the unique nature of our two founding cultures will serve us well in this inquiry . 
meanwhile , I will keep my substantive remarks for my speech which will close this inquiry later . 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I would like to begin by thanking Senator Poulin for her kind words . 
this is a rather touchy and , to be frank , frustrating subject . 
as a native of Ottawa who has never left it , I find this debate a painful one . 
on December 6 , the Government of Ontario introduced a bill on the amalgamation of the municipalities in Ottawa - Carleton and other Ontario regions into single cities . 
the legislation relating to Ottawa - Carleton is based in large part on the report by Mr. Glen Shortliffe , a provincially - appointed consultant hired to study local reform . 
his report was released on November 26 , 1999 , and contained numerous recommendations on the new city . 
one of these proposed that the new amalgamated City of Ottawa should be institutionally bilingual . 
the province chose not to heed this recommendation on bilingualism for the capital of this country . 
the legislation provides that the city , once organized , will have the authority to determine its own language policies . 
in his report on restructuring , Mr. Shortliffe recommends that the City of Ottawa - this is the new official name - be bilingual . 
in the preface to his report , he describes this region as a unique mosaic of francophones and anglophones . 
he justifies his recommendation by stating : 
one of the most important issues raised during public consultations was the question of institutional bilingualism . 
over 15 per cent of the new City of Ottawa will be francophone . 
Ottawa is a unique city in this province and in this country , since it is the capital of Canada . 
we know that our nation has two official languages . 
the national government operates under the Official Languages Act , in both English and French . 
the National Capital must reflect the character of the entire country , and must acknowledge the presence within its population of a sizeable francophone minority . 
quoting Mr. Shortliffe again : 
i recommend that the enabling statute establish and designate the City of Ottawa as officially bilingual , in French and in English . 
i should point out that Mr. Shortliffe explicitly recommended that the new city be designated as bilingual by the Ontario legislature and not by Ottawa ' s new municipal council . 
moreover , Mr. Shortliffe noted that it will be up to the City of Ottawa ' s senior council to determine the scope and nature of the services that will be available in both official languages of the country . 
it is true that under the Canadian Constitution , municipal governments are exclusively a provincial jurisdiction . 
in the case of the Ottawa - Hull region , there is another level of authority established by the federal government called the National Capital Commission , that is the National Capital Region . 
the act established the National Capital Commission , which replaced the Federal District Commission . 
the authority to establish the National Capital Region was given by the residual constitutional power to pass laws for peace , order and good government . 
there are a number of options to correct the decision made by the Province of Ontario regarding bilingualism in the national capital . 
the courts may use them to clarify the issue . 
i am not a lawyer , but I am convinced that there will be problems . 
provincial legislatures have the power to pass legislation concerning municipalities . 
the Government of Ontario was free to accept or reject Mr. Shortliffe ' s recommendation . 
still , the recent ruling of the Ontario courts regarding the Montfort Hospital could be used as an argument . 
as you all know , the ruling made by the Divisional Court has been appealed , and I hope that some day we will get justice regarding health services in Ontario . 
on November 29 , 1999 , the Ontario Divisional Court unanimously struck down a directive by the Health Services Restructuring Commission ordering the Montfort Hospital to be closed as a general hospital and turned into a large clinic . 
the court ruled that the Montfort Hospital was necessary to preserve the francophone community in Ontario . 
it said the Commission was not at liberty to ignore the constitutional role played by the Montfort Hospital as a truly francophone centre necessary to promote and enhance the Franco - Ontarian identity . 
the francophone minority in Ontario is a cultural and linguistic entity and it needs its institutions to protect its culture and language from assimilation . 
the judges said that the Government of Ontario must respect the principle of minority protection in all its actions . 
it agreed that francophones have a constitutional right to protection from assimilation as one of the founding cultural communities of Canada and as one of the two official language groups whose rights are entrenched in the constitution . 
the court ruled , and I quote : 
... given the principle of minority protection - particularly , francophone minority protection - is an independent principle underlying the constitution , and one ... which is binding upon governments , the Court must intervene , where necessary , to protect against government action which fails to recognize that principle . 
there are those who view the ruling handed down in the Montfort Hospital decision as an unacceptable example of militant action by the judiciary . 
the National Post explored this view . 
if you are interested , read what it had to say , but do not lose your temper . 
others feel that it may provide a powerful weapon for the protection of minority rights . 
many of the arguments in the decision were based on two recent Supreme Court of Canada rulings , the Reference on Quebec Secession , and Beaulac , where the court upheld the right of a British Columbia man to a bilingual trial . 
yesterday , we learned that the Health Services Restructuring Commission requested authorization to appeal the decision handed down by the Divisional Court in the Montfort Hospital case . 
the government indicated its unconditional support for such an appeal . 
even if court action did not manage to force the Government of Ontario to designate the new City of Ottawa officially bilingual , it might be useful in terms of public policy . 
it would certainly have the effect of making the issue better known . 
if it happened to slow down the amalgamation , pressure would be put on the provincial government ; on the other hand , there is a risk that it might trigger opposition and resentment among those who insist that the issue of amalgamation be settled once and for all . 
the purpose of the Senate is to represent the country ' s regions and particularly to protect minorities . 
a motion could be tabled in the Senate calling for the Government of Ontario to designate the new City of Ottawa officially bilingual . 
it might be worth pointing out in this connection that the Quebec National Assembly has adopted a similar motion . 
the federal Parliament may not wish to interfere in a clearly provincial matter , but the Government of Ontario shows no hesitation in interfering with federal affairs as far as taxation is concerned . 
it is making recommendations to us just about every day to lower taxes . 
if that is not provincial interference , I do not know what it is . 
in addition to the fact that there is a sizeable francophone minority in the Ottawa region , the courts are increasingly recognizing the protection of minorities as an underlying principle to the Constitution and one with constitutional value . 
the recent decision on Montfort Hospital raised the question as to whether francophone education is to be replaced by a bilingual institution . 
the Ottawa amalgamation project , however , concerns more than just the issue of bilingualism . 
nevertheless , it is significant that certain of the municipalities to be amalgamated , in particular Vanier , Gloucester and Cumberland , have a sizeable francophone population and a long tradition of official bilingualism . 
the lack of protection of these communities in the new city of Ottawa raises questions similar to those raised by the Montfort issue . 
the new City of Ottawa could always just be left to decide whether it wanted to be declared officially bilingual . 
it might choose not to , or it might go back on its decision later on . 
for greater assurance , it would be better for the enabling provincial legislation to address the issue . 
the issue of bilingualism can be a highly controversial one , like the David Levine matter and the Montfort Hospital . 
it would be more responsible on the part of the Government of Ontario to show some leadership and to decide to designate the amalgamated city officially bilingual right from the start . 
Mr. Shortliffe ' s report is carefully drafted and structured . 
as he says , the francophone and anglophone character of the region is part of its unique mosaic . 
the Government of Ontario should implement this important recommendation . 
in the Monro case , back in 1966 , the Supreme Court of Canada clearly confirmed the power of the federal government over the national capital region . 
this is something which should distinguish , or which already distinguishes Ottawa from the surrounding region and from the other regions of Ontario . 
the Ontario superior court also mentioned the four principles that underline our constitution : democracy , federalism , constitutionalism and the protection of minorities , particularly the francophone minority . 
these principles were established by the Supreme Court of Canada in the cases mentioned above , including the reference on the secession of Quebec and the Beaulac case . 
the Government of Ontario seems to want to leave it up to Ottawa to designate itself officially bilingual . 
this may be due to two reasons : the provincial government ' s refusal to be perceived as being pro - francophone and , second , its desire not to open the door to official bilingualism in Ontario , as described in section 133 of the Constitution of Canada . 
in conclusion , honourable senators , I insist that the City of Ottawa is unique . 
it is the national capital of an officially bilingual country . 
if it is to remain the national capital - and I emphasize the word " if " - and continue to enjoy the benefits that go with this status , Ottawa should be officially bilingual . 
in addition to being the national capital , the City of Ottawa is located on the Quebec - Ontario border . 
it has a rich francophone history and culture and it has a significant francophone minority . 
at a time of increasing tensions about our confederation and the secession of Quebec , the bilingual character of the national capital takes on a symbolic importance . 
in addition to the fact that there is a significant francophone minority in the Ottawa region , the courts increasingly recognize the protection of minorities as an underlying principle of the Constitution and a constitutional value . 
the Globe and Mail was not as magnanimous regarding the Montfort Hospital . 
the future belongs to those who fight . 
such is the motto of Le Droit , our French daily newspaper in Ontario . 
that is exactly what we will do . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
not only this decision annihilates , at the stroke of a pen , the result of several years of fighting , thereby weakening again the Franco - Ontarian minority community , but it also flies in the face of the basic concept , of the ideal we have of this country where , in the national capital , the two founding linguistic communities can live in harmony , develop and grow richer from being in contact with each other . 
the previous governments of the Honourable John Robarts , Bill Davis , David Peterson and Bob Rae would not have been that insensitive . 
without realizing it , the Harris government is attacking the very basis of the Canadian idea . 
this is a denial of our aspirations , it shows a troubling ignorance of the efforts made by those who came before us and it marks a return to prejudice and indifference which we no longer expected from our leaders . 
Ottawa is like no other city . 
it is the capital of Canada . 
both the government and the Parliament of Canada work in the country ' s two official languages . 
the Canadian Constitution sees to it , and the Supreme Court of Canada so eloquently demonstrated it in its decision from August 20 , 1998 on the secession of Quebec . 
this decision is crucial to understand the principles that guide us and upon which our democracy is based . 
need I remind my colleagues that there are four of these principles : federalism , democracy , the constitutionalist approach and the rule of law and last but not least the protection of minority rights . 
it is to this last principle , the " protection of minority rights " , that I want to draw your attention . 
honourable senators , I submit that the decision of the Ontario government to strike down the previous bylaws of the cities of Ottawa and Vanier , that recognized the bilingual status of these communities , and to replace them by a piece of legislation that does not provide any such guarantee is , in my view , unconstitutional and contrary to the fundamental principle that protects the rights of all linguistic minorities , as mentioned in the decision handed down by the Supreme Court of Canada on August 20 , 1998 . 
how can we not react to this tactic to revoke the bilingual status of both the cities of Ottawa and Vanier and merge them in a huge entity , while totally disregarding the impact such an initiative would have on the rights of an official language minority ? 
let us consider the precedent being set here : huge mergers are enough to erase 132 years of tenacious battle . 
we recently had an example with the Montfort Hospital . 
merging it with three other hospitals from the Ottawa - Carleton area was enough to make it disappear . 
recently , on November 29 to be exact , in a unanimous decision , three judges of the Ontario Superior Court quashed this decision , finding it to be unconstitutional and contrary to the protection of the franco - Ontarian minority rights . 
let me remind my colleagues of the fundamental elements of this decision made by the Ontario Court . 
first of all , the court recognized that the Montfort Hospital played a role in the Ottawa - Carleton area that also extended to the whole province . 
it also pointed out that the Franco - Ontarian community constantly had to fight against assimilation in order to survive . 
the court added and I quote : 
that is at page 6 of the judgment . 
in order to survive , these linguistic communities should be supported by a whole network of institutions that foster their development and that help check assimilation . 
i quote : 
the francophone nature of their institution has thus become increasingly important in fulfilling the role of preserving and protecting that culture . 
that is at page 7 of the judgment . 
thus , these institutions must exist in as wide a range of spheres of social activities as possible in order to permit the minority community to develop and maintain its vitality . 
institutions are also important symbols for the Franco - Ontarian community . 
they reflect the identity of the group , the French presence in Ontario and in Canada , the French reality in public life , and the strength and vitality of the community . 
that is at page 7 of the judgment . 
the court did recognize the importance of the French language to keep this community alive . 
the French language is the key cultural component of the Franco - Ontarian community . 
that is at page 8 of the judgment . 
honourable senators , do you not agree that these characteristics apply to the new city of Ottawa , which will have more than 125,000 French - speaking citizens , representing more than 15 per cent of the population ? 
the city of Ottawa is the main component of the area under the National Capital Commission , which is itself a bilingual agency . 
how will French - speaking Canadians from other areas who live in Ottawa as representatives of their region react to the indifference of the Ontario government to the very symbol of our national life ? 
in the past , mayors of Ottawa did understand this issue . 
why ignore years of linguistic harmony and force francophones to fight again for their rights ? 
why create more political tensions when we had linguistic peace and mutual respect ? 
the decision of the Ontario government is inconsistent with the spirit of our Constitution . 
it is inconsistent with the respect for equality between both communities that is the very foundation of the Canadian pact . 
the Superior Court of Ontario has reminded us that the principle of the protection of minority rights , and I quote : 
... are not simply " descriptive " of rights . 
they infuse our Constitution and breathe life into it . 
albeit they are unwritten , these underlying principles of the constitution may nonetheless give rise to substantive legal rights , which constitute substantive limitation upon government action ; moreover , they are " invested with a powerful normative force and are binding upon courts and governments . " 
in that regard , the Court was quoting the Reference re Secession of Quebec [ 1998 , 2 S . C . R . 217 ] at pages 248 and 249 of the opinion of the Court . 
the Supreme Court said that Canada is a constitutional democracy . 
in simple terms , this means that the constitutionalism principle requires that any government initiative respects the Constitution . 
that is found at page 8 of the judgment . 
the Ontario government legislation which abolishes the bilingual statute of the new municipality of Ottawa ... 
... must be measured against the " minority protection " benchmark , one of the fundamental organizing principles of the constitution . 
if the conduct is found wanting and in violation of that principle , the reviewing court must intervene ... 
that is at page 20 of the judgment . 
honourable senators , we must draw the conclusions which are obvious . 
given that the principle of minority protection - particularly francophone minority protection - is an independent principle underlying the constitution , and one which has a powerful normative force , which is binding upon government , the Court must intervene , where necessary , to protect against government action which fails to recognize that principle . 
that is at page 23 of the judgment . 
francophones living in Ottawa and Vanier and , to another degree , those living in Cumberland and Gloucester will no longer have the right to be served in French in the new municipality . 
this will also be true for the other Canadians who are in Ottawa to represent their constituents , their region or , like myself , their senatorial district . 
consequently , we must warn the Ontario government that if it refuses to reconsider the legislation abolishing the bilingual statute for the new municipality of Ottawa , a prosecution will be instituted before the Ontario courts that have jurisdiction over these matters in order to invalidate the provisions of this bill abolishing the recognition of French in the statutes of the new municipality . 
honourable senators , there is something deeply unjust in an amalgamation project that will submerge in a very large city a whole community which has had protected rights up to now . 
it would really be too simple to circumvent in that way principles that are the foundation of our constitutional order . 
this is a ideal which is the very basis of the special identity of our country . 
this ideal is never realized once and for all , and those who strive for it can never rest . 
we cannot tolerate that short - sighted provincial politicians who have no national vision take aim at our ideal , and refrain from using the means our Constitution affords us . 
we should not let this initiative become the symbol of the failure of our community , which would not be able to carve its own place in our national capital . 
honourable senators , it is my firm intention to ensure that the Ontario legislation , which does not recognize the rights of the francophone minority in Ottawa and of all Canadians who truly believe in the equality of both official languages , is struck down . 
let us prove that , once a government has granted a status to our community , it can no longer act in a discriminatory way to restore inequality . 
twenty - three years ago , I sued the then Minister of Transport of my own government in order to have a regulation prohibiting the use of French in the cockpit struck down ; also 23 years ago , I sued Air Canada to force the Crown corporation to take whatever steps were necessary to make French a working language in the air transport industry . 
these two legal actions were well received by the courts of Canada . 
seventeen years ago , as the Secretary of State for Canada , I contributed to the development of the Court Challenges Program designed to help official language minorities protect their rights . 
again today , we will have to turn to this program in our determination to ensure their survival and development . 
the Ontario government has decided to appeal the decision concerning the Montfort Hospital . 
it saw fit to challenge the legitimacy of that decision . 
let us stay the fight , all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada if necessary , where our rights are to be ultimately recognized . 
therefore , I invite Senator Marie - P . 
Poulin , Senator Jean - Robert Gauthier , as well as the people of Ottawa and all Canadians to join me in turning to the courts to protect their rights and that of all those who believe in a country which holds the linguistic equality of French and English to be an important mark of civilization and freedom essential to human dignity . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I should like to ask some questions of the Honourable Senator Joyal . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
since the speaking time of the Honourable Senator Joyal has expired , is there leave for the honourable senator to continue to answer questions ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is getting late and there are those who have obligations . 
senator Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I will keep the comments of the Leader of the Opposition in mind and be as brief as possible . 
this is an important issue . 
we have heard from three francophone senators on the matter . 
i have a comment and a question for the honourable senator . 
personally , I find it incomprehensible that the bipartisan policy of the Ontario government was not to move forcefully on this issue . 
premiers Robarts and Davis of the Conservative Party , Premier Peterson of the Liberal Party and Premier Rae of the NDP would have been upset - and I hope we will hear from them - about this diversion or frolic of the present Government of Ontario . 
i make that comment as a senator from Metro Toronto . 
if the honourable senator proceeds with the court action , as a senator from metropolitan Toronto , Ontario , I would be glad to join with him in it . 
it is important that non - francophone senators indicate their displeasure with policies in regions they represent . 
the first would be to extend the geographical reach of the National Capital Commission , which I assume could be done through a private member ' s bill in this place . 
thus , there would be no question that the geographical territory would be totally bilingual . 
second , has he considered the power of the federal government to disallow this legislation ? 
senator Joyal : 
honourable senators , Senator Grafstein ' s question raises a complex legal issue . 
the National Capital Commission does not have jurisdiction to provide municipal services , such as fire fighting , policing , recreation facilities , and so on . 
according to the National Capital Commission , there are certain responsibilities which come under the urban planning provisions , especially in relation to the federal presence . 
i refer to administration services and so on which , to a point , overlap those of the municipal government . 
even if we were to extend the boundaries of the National Capital Commission to cover the whole of the territory of the new city , the new City of Ottawa would be bound by the legislation in the same way as the existing city . 
with regard to the disallowance power , honourable senators will understand that this is a very complex question . 
the Supreme Court of Canada has ruled that a power does not suffer extinction as long as it is in the Constitution . 
however , that would be a matter for the Government of Canada to consider if a recommendation were made to the Governor General of Canada in that context , taking into account that that power has not been used for a very long time . 
if it were used , it would be under exceptional circumstances . 
it might be a short way to seeing the solution we desire , but there are other means at our disposal which could be as effective . 
it would be helpful for all Canadians in all the provinces to have a decision on this matter . 
i see Senator Lynch - Staunton sitting on the other side of the chamber . 
he will know that North Hatley and Ayer ' s Cliff are in the process of a merger in the same context . 
however , if they merge , North Hatley will lose its status as a bilingual town recognized under paragraph 13 ( f ) of the Loi sur la langue fran ç aise au Qu é bec . 
they want to merge services . 
some 40 per cent of the population of the new town would be English - speaking , which would cause them to lose their bilingual status . 
this issue is such an important one that it could not be addressed by a disallowance power . 
it is extremely important in this country that the minority rights of individuals - be it in the English - speaking minority or in the French - speaking minority - are assured . 
that is to say , once their rights are recognized , those rights cannot , through the back door , be reduced by administrative objectives that are financially sound but , in terms of minority rights , amount to total destruction of those very rights . 
on motion of Senator Fraser , debate adjourned . 
the Senate 
motion to Uphold Royal Assent Proceedings - Motion Stands 
on Motion No. 43 : 
that the Senate of Canada affirm its Royal Assent procedure in the Senate described by parliamentary authorities Norman Wilding and Philip Laundy " The Canadian ceremony seems to be that which most closely resembles the original . " ; 
that the Senate uphold the sovereign right of Her Majesty , as enacted in the Constitution Act 1867 , in the Royal Prerogative of the Royal Assent in respect of parliamentary proceedings and bills considered , voted or passed in both Houses of Parliament ; 
that the Senate as the House of Her Majesty ' s Royal Assent affirm its ancient constitutional right as the House of the Parliament , the House for the proceedings of the three estates of Parliament acting together as the One Parliament of Canada ; 
that the Senate affirm the Law of Parliament , the " lex parliamenti " , that ancient law which holds that the Royal Consent is required for Parliament ' s consideration of any bill or any parliamentary proceeding altering Her Majesty ' s Royal Prerogative ; 
that the Senate affirm that the parliamentary procedure for a private member of Parliament to obtain the Royal Consent is a motion for an Address to Her Majesty requesting the same , as distinct from the other forms for obtaining Royal Consent which may be available to the Prime Minister or ministers acting under political ministerial responsibility ; and 
that the Senate affirm the necessity of the Royal Consent as given by Her Majesty to the consideration of bills affecting the Royal Prerogative , as that Royal Consent which was given by Queen Elizabeth II to the 1967 Royal Assent Bill , which Consent was delivered in the United Kingdom House of Lords by the Lord Chancellor Lord Gardiner at the bill ' s second reading on March 2 , 1967 , stating : 
" my Lords , I have it in command from Her Majesty the Queen to acquaint the House that Her Majesty , having been informed of the purport of the Royal Assent Bill , has consented to place Her prerogative and interest , so far as they are affected by the Bill , at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the Bill . " 
and weeks later , on April 17,1967 , in the United Kingdom House of Commons , delivered by the Attorney General Sir Elwyn Jones , stating : 
" i have it in Command from the Queen to acquaint the House that Her Majesty , having been informed of the purport of the Bill , has consented to place Her prerogative and interest , so far as they are affected by the Bill , at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the Bill . 
i beg to move , that the Bill be now read a Second time . " 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I rise on a point of order . 
even though the sponsor of the motion , Senator Cools , is not here , if I do not raise this matter now I may be faulted for not having raised it at the earliest possible occasion . 
i suggest that the rule of anticipation should be invoked here . 
in effect , if this motion is allowed to proceed on the Order Paper , it will result in the same subject matter being on the Order Paper twice . 
one conflicts with the other . 
the rule of anticipation , as stated in Beauchesne ' s 6 th edition , paragraph 512 ( 1 ) , states : 
the rule of anticipation , a rule which forbids discussion of a matter standing on the Order Paper from being forestalled , is dependent upon the same principle as that which forbids the same question from being raised twice within the same session . 
i would also draw your attention to paragraph 512 ( 2 ) . 
my point of order is that the bill , Bill S - 7 , is a more effective form of proceeding than the motion to be moved by Senator Cools . 
consequently , the debate on Bill S - 7 should have precedence and the senator ' s motion should not be on the Order Paper . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , Senator Cools is not in the chamber . 
therefore , I would beg the indulgence of honourable senators to at least give her an opportunity to be heard on the point of order being raised by Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
accordingly , I would suggest that the discussion of the point of order resume tomorrow when she is in the chamber . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , there is no motion before the chamber at this point . 
we have a notice of motion which was given by the Honourable Senator Cools . 
therefore , there is nothing on which I can rule . 
however , I appreciate the point made by Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton . 
i have been considering this situation , but I can do nothing until such time as the motion is actually moved . 
at that point , I will be pleased to entertain a question concerning the rules . 
motion stands . 
the Senate adjourned until Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 , at 1:30 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 22 
Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
hockey Legends 
team Canada 1999 
appointment of Lieutenant - Governor Lois Hole 
distinguished Visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Certain Major Air Carriers to Negotiate - Third Report of Transport and Communications Committee Presented 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
second Report of Committee Presented 
adjournment 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
report of Canadian Delegation to Tenth Annual Bilateral Meeting with Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League Tabled 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Delegation to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from November 17 - 19 , 1999 Tabled 
canada - China Legislative Assembly 
report of Canadian Delegation to Second Annual Meeting from October 25 - 31 Tabled 
the Senate 
notice of Motion in Support of Declaring Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
question PERIOD 
finance 
transport 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
health 
increased Spending for Breast Cancer Research 
treasury Board 
prime Minister ' s Office 
lieutenant - Governor of Nova Scotia - Appointment of Successor - Possibility of Non - partisan Selection 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1999 - 2000 
second Reading 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading - Debate Continued 
the SENATE 
Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 
the Senate met at 1:30 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
hockey Legends 
team Canada 1999 
hon. Francis William Mahovlich : 
honourable senators , today I should like to describe my version of Team Canada 1999 . It has been 27 years since the " Series of the Century " in 1972 , when the world stopped for a moment to witness Canada ' s great win . 
now , as then , there are political overtones . 
our trip was organized mainly by Mr. Alexander Tikanov , who will be running for governor of the area . 
Mr. Tikanov is not only a political whiz but also has more Olympic and sports medals than any of our senators . 
the purpose for my trip was to witness firsthand the changes in Moscow and Russia since 1972 and to play the rubber match we won in 1972 and lost in 1974 . 
the team consisted of Hall of Famers Guy Lafleur and his son , Gilbert Perreault and his son , Marcel Dionne , Steve Shutt and Brad Park . 
Goaltender Richard Savigny and Gaston Gingras helped fill up the roster , along with others , including my son Ted Mahovlich . 
to summarize the match , Guy Lafleur was outstanding in game number one , scoring a hat trick . 
the father - son combination of Frank and Ted Mahovlich scored with minutes to go in the second game , and Frank was voted the star of the game ! 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Mahovlich : 
the trophy will be displayed in my office . 
i did not get a chance . 
the coaches were Hall of Famers Ivan Cournoyer and Bobby Hull . 
for game number four , we did not want to leave anything to chance , so everyone was ready to play the game of their lives . 
the outcome , 5 - 2 in our favour , was thanks to the sons , Marc - Andr é Perreault , Martin Lafleur and Edward Mahovlich , who scored two goals . 
the Russians also had great players from the 1972 series : 
did this team make an impression ? 
i would say no doubt - especially if impression means the rendition of volume and perspective through toned colour to achieve light effects that eliminate outline . 
some senators would say that I am talking more about a Monet painting or a C é zanne . 
however , that is not true . 
this team left in the minds of the Russians a masterpiece in behaviour , team spirit , determination and sportsmanship . 
i was proud to be part of it all . 
in turn , the Russians could not do enough for us . 
if Marie wanted to visit the Bolshoi , the Pushkin or the subway station , we had Olag and Stash , the bodyguards , at our disposal . 
the trip included a game in St. Petersburg and a visit to the Hermitage , the winter palace of the Czars . 
we travelled overnight by train and visited the new hockey arena that will stage the World Junior Hockey Championships in April 2000 . 
canada will be well represented . 
the executive in charge gave us a tour and explained that the rink was 80 per cent finished and would be ready for 2000 - and it has a seating capacity of 12,000 - at a cost of $ 75 million . 
when I asked where the money came from , he mentioned the bank and some large investors . 
the highlight of the trip was the changes that have taken place . 
we visited the Kremlin , where Yeltsin had just finished a meeting with Leonid Kuchma , President of the Ukraine . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
i am sorry , Senator Mahovlich , but your time has expired . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
overtime , please ! 
some Hon. Senators : 
shootout ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
do you wish leave to continue ? 
senator Mahovlich : 
yes , Your Honour . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it agreed ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
please continue . 
senator Mahovlich : 
the Kremlin has been refurbished to the tune of U.S. $ 350 million and it is a building of which Russia can be proud . 
i have been to Washington , France , Beijing and Australia . 
nothing compares to the job that was done on the famous roofs of the Kremlin where , at one time , the czars and the czarinas ruled . 
if any senator has the opportunity to visit Russia , seeing the Kremlin is a must . 
Mr. Pavel Boredin , the third in command , was kind enough to explain in detail what all the rooms represented and their functions both for the Communist Party and for the czars . 
the place was so vast , it felt like our Parliament buildings could be placed in one room , and there were three rooms of that size . 
it is quite intimidating when President Yeltsin has a meeting in one of these rooms and there is a desk , two chairs , and all the other furniture is moved out . 
the pillars are made of malachite and lapis lazuli , with paintings of Russian historic heroes adorning the walls . 
the one thing about Russia that remains constant is the habit of making toasts and speeches . 
we had to fill our shot glasses with water after a couple of vodkas in order to keep up with them . 
the highlight of the trip was a visit to the cemeteries with the wives and sons of the hockey coaches and players . 
the Russians make regular visits to honour their fellow players , such as Alexander Kharlamov , who passed away in 1981 . 
the headstones are works of art. 
for example , there was a bust of Tarasov on top of a piece of granite , which was split in half with iron hockey sticks in the middle of the rock . 
i was so impressed and I took so many photos that I ran out of film . 
many of the Russians spoke to us about their coaches and players . 
as the captain of the team , I spoke about Tarasov , our meeting in the early 1960 s , and of my experiences witnessing one of Kharlamov ' s famous goals . 
the trip ended with a party at the Savoy Hotel and Russian - style entertainment and dancing . 
both teams were present , unlike 1972 when the Russians did not show after losing . 
also present were Canadian Ambassador Rod Irwin and Mrs. Irwin . 
the cigar smoke finally got to us , so we returned when Julie left . 
we had packing to do for the flight home the next morning . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
some Hon. Senators : 
appointment of Lieutenant - Governor Lois Hole 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I am sure other honourable senators from Alberta join me in drawing the attention of the Senate to the change in the position of the lieutenant - governor in our home province . 
Lois is a businesswoman , an author , a broadcaster and an education activist who has served for some 30 years in various capacities on the boards of school districts in and around the town of St. Albert . 
she has generously offered her volunteer support in efforts within her community and the city of Edmonton , where she is much admired for her skill and spirited good humour . 
Lois Hole ' s advice is sought throughout North America and , in the past five years , she has spoken to some 600 groups and businesses . 
she was awarded the Order of Canada and became Chancellor of the University of Alberta a year and a half ago . 
already , she has exhibited a zestful anticipation of her new responsibilities as she intends to place a public focus on the importance of education and learning for citizens of all ages . 
i wish her great success and will support her in any way I can . 
honourable senators , Lois follows a wonderful gentleman , Bud Olson , a Medicine Hat farmer who for more than four decades has led a life of public service . 
he was a member of the House of Commons for 15 years and a senator from 1977 until he became Lieutenant - Governor in 1996 . 
throughout his career , Bud was recognized as one of the most skilled debaters and procedural experts of his time . 
he certainly was a great teacher to me in all the years of our friendship on Parliament Hill . 
the constant element of Bud Olson ' s service has been as a passionate and outspoken voice for the concerns of his province and , particularly , of the farm community . 
overarching all of that has been a fierce patriotism for this country and its unity , which he carried with him into his most recent position . 
i know all honourable senators in this house join me in welcoming Lois Hole and in congratulating Bud Olson . 
god bless you , Bud . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , it would be almost impossible to gild the lily after Senator Fairbairn ' s comments , but I should say a few words . 
i wish Bud Olson good health in his retirement . 
my connection with Bud goes back many years . 
bud was always dedicated to politics . 
he was a logical and tough debater . 
i recall him campaigning on a motorcycle for the Social Credit Party in southern Alberta . 
not too many years later , he was a Liberal cabinet minister and riding around in a limousine . 
that shows how some of the outhern Alberta people can move . 
i see Senator Ghitter nodding his head . 
i have known Lois Hole for more years than she would care to remember . 
one of the new definitions of " homelessness " is being a Liberal in Calgary . 
i went up to Northern Alberta , and Lois and Ted were big supporters in my new constituency . 
after so many years together in education , I thought I might have an " in " . 
a friend of mine was recruiting football players from the high school graduates in Alberta to play in Oklahoma . 
i took him to visit the Hole family , with their two strapping sons . 
the whole family is interested in athletics , but Lois told me in no uncertain terms that , although the boys could make up their own minds , as parents they wanted to see their sons play football in Canada . 
i mention that merely to show that Lois is the matriarch of the clan . 
Ted and the boys had a great deal to do with building the family business . 
Lois is noted primarily for her interest in education as well as for being an author . 
many of us will have a chance to meet her in the years ahead because she is young and energetic and will be moving around this country quite a bit . 
she will make a great lieutenant - governor . 
appointment of Lieutenant - GovernorLynda Haverstock 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , I do not know the new Lieutenant - Governor of the Province of Alberta , but I wish her well . 
i do know the new appointee to the Province of Saskatchewan , Lynda Haverstock . 
Lynda Haverstock will set new ground in the so - called curriculum vitae of a lieutenant - governor . 
Ms Haverstock was a teenage , unwed mother , a high - school dropout , who now has her Ph . D . in psychology . 
she has spent many years working with farm families in crisis , providing counselling in all of its dimensions . 
i think that is an important aspect of what she will bring to her new position as the Lieutenant - Governor of the Province of Saskatchewan . 
Lynda was an active politician for a number of years . 
she was leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan at about the same time that I was the leader of the Liberal Party in Manitoba . 
as Liberal fortunes were not particularly on the upswing in either province at the time , she and I did a certain amount of commiserating on a number of occasions . 
i think that the Prime Minister has chosen well . 
by the time both of these women are sworn in , 50 per cent of the lieutenant - governors of the country will be females . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Carstairs : 
he has also made an excellent choice in that Ms Haverstock has struggled , as have many in Saskatchewan , and she has a firsthand knowledge of the struggle that people in Saskatchewan are presently facing . 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , this will be one of the few times that I say something good about a Liberal . 
as you know , the Prime Minister appointed Ms Lynda Haverstock to be the new Lieutenant - Governor of Saskatchewan . She replaced another great Liberal , Jack Wiebe . 
Lynda struggled as leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan , but I have a lot of time for Lynda Haverstock . 
she is a friend of mine . 
her husband and I play golf as many times as we can . 
she is a woman of principle . 
she will handle the office with great dignity . 
she is an example to us that patronage appointments do work . 
i teased Lynda about her appointment at the airport last week . 
i had travelled with her husband from Toronto to Saskatoon , and he had told me that her appointment had been announced . 
i had thought she was going to be an open - line talk show host . 
as you may know , she has had some problems with the present Leader of the Liberal Party , Jim Melenchuk , problems which were quite serious . 
i told her husband that she could get her revenge because he is now a member of the NDP caucus and when one of his bills comes up for her signature , she could just throw it in the garbage . 
Lynda will appreciate that . 
after Senator Carstairs ' s nice words about Ms Haverstock , I wanted to add to what she has said and congratulate Ms Haverstock . 
i know she will represent the province well . 
she is one of the few appointments that the Prime Minister has made that I fully support . 
distinguished Visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to welcome two of our former colleagues to the the gallery this afternoon - the Honourable Lorne Bonnell and the Honourable Eugene Whelan . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to the Canada Transportation Act to Allow Certain Major Air Carriers to Negotiate - Third Report of Transport and Communications Committee Presented 
hon. Lise Bacon , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications presented the following report : 
Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorised on October 14 , 1999 , to examine and report pursuant to subsection 47 ( 5 ) of the Canada Transportation Act , the order laid before this Chamber on September 14 , 1999 , authorising certain major air carriers and persons to negotiate and enter into any conditional agreement , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical , and other personnel as may be necessary . 
the budget was considered by the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration on Thursday , December 9 , 1999 . In its Second Report , the Committee recommended that an amount of $ 19,900 be released for this study . 
the report was adopted by the Senate on Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 . 
respectfully submitted , 
LISE BACON 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Bacon , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
energy , the Environment and Natural Resources 
second Report of Committee Presented 
hon. Mira Spivak , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment and Natural Resources , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Energy , the Environment , and Natural Resources has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Wednesday , December 1 , 1999 , to examine such issues as may arise from time to time relating to energy , the environment , and natural resources , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical , and other personnel as may be necessary , and to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of such studies . 
the budget was considered by the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets , and Administration on Thursday , December 9 , 1999 . In its Second Report , the Committee noted that it is undertaking a review of the budgetary situation pertaining to Senate Committees , and recommended that no more than 6 / 12 of the funds be released until February 10 , 2000 . 
the report was adopted by the Senate on Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 . 
respectfully submitted , 
MIRA SPIVAK 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Spivak , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
recommendations of RoyalCommission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
report of Aboriginal Peoples Committeeon Study Presented 
hon. Charlie Watt , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples , presented the following report : 
Wednesday , December 15 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal peoples has the honour to present its 
second REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Wednesday November 24 , 1999 to examine and report on the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples respecting Aboriginal governance , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary , for the purpose of its examination . 
the budget was considered by the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration on Thursday , December 9 , 1999 . In its Second Report , the Committee recommended that an amount of $ 14,750 be released for this study . 
the report was adopted by the Senate on Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 . 
respectfully submitted , 
CHARLIE WATT 
chair 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
when shall this report be taken into consideration , honourable senators ? 
on motion of Senator Watt , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
adjournment 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( l ) ( i ) , I move : 
that at 3:30 p.m. today , if the business of the Senate has not been completed , the Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings to adjourn the Senate ; 
that should a division be deferred until 5:30 p.m. today , the Speaker shall interrupt the proceedings at 3:30 p.m. to suspend the sitting until 5:30 p.m. for the taking of the deferred division ; and 
that all matters on the Orders of the Day and on the Notice Paper , which have not been reached , shall retain their position . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group 
report of Canadian Delegation to Tenth Annual Bilateral Meeting with Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League Tabled 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the report of the Canadian delegation of the tenth annual bilateral meeting between the Canada - Japan Inter - Parliamentary Group and the Japan - Canada Parliamentarians Friendship League held in Tokyo , Hiroshima , and on Shikoku Island , Japan , from November 6 - 13 , 1999 . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Delegation to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from November 17 - 19 , 1999 Tabled 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian delegation of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association , OSCE , to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly , OSCE PA , Expanded Bureau Meeting , and OSCE Summit held in Istanbul , Turkey , November 17 - 19 , 1999 . 
canada - China Legislative Assembly 
report of Canadian Delegation to Second Annual Meeting from October 25 - 31 Tabled 
hon. Jack Austin : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the third report of the Canada - China Legislative Association concerning the second bilateral meeting held in Ottawa , Toronto , Winnipeg and Victoria , Canada , from October 25 to 31 , 1999 . 
the Senate 
notice of Motion in Support of Declaring Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I give notice that tomorrow , Thursday , December 16 , 1999 , I will move that Ottawa , Canada ' s capital city , should be officially bilingual . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
he told us about the subject matter . 
with respect , I do not think that is sufficient . 
we need the text of the motion tabled . 
senator Gauthier : 
honourable senators , I am prepared to table the motion in question . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I believe the only problem is with communications . 
as you know , the honourable senator does not hear well and there may be a problem . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
why do we not agree to revert to Notices of Motions ? 
hon. Dan Hays ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I agree to revert to Notices of Motions later in the day when Senator Gauthier has the notice of motion in proper form . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I think , as Senator Hays was asking leave to revert later so Senator Gauthier could make his notice of motion , Senator Gauthier was right on his feet ready to make the notice of motion . 
senator Hays : 
all right . 
senator Gauthier : 
honourable senators , the confusion may be due to the fact that , because of my deafness , I must read on this portable computer in front of me what honourable senators have just said . 
however , I do have a motion , and I will give it to the page to take to the Table . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed that we need not revert later ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
question PERIOD 
finance 
term Limits of Members of Canada PensionPlan Investment Board 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , my question is to the Leader of the Government and has to do with the Canada Pension Plan and the recommendations of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce . 
the Banking Committee undertook an extensive review of the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board in the early part of 1988 . 
i was happy to see that the federal and provincial governments agreed to at least one of our recommendations , that of a limit on the number of terms to which a director may be appointed . 
in his September 1998 response to our committee report , the minister said that term limits would require legislative changes . 
if honourable senators remember the debate at the time , there was an unbelievable hurry to get the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board bill through Parliament . 
the minister said that these changes could not be made because they required legislative action . 
now that the Minister of Finance has responded to that part of the bill and said that there will be a term limit to which directors may be appointed , we do not see any reference to legislation in last week ' s announcement . 
the officials who were contacted by our side were not aware of any plans to bring in legislation to deal with the measures announced last week . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am unaware of any legislation being brought forward at this point by the Minister of Finance . 
he might choose to do so at a later time , but I am not aware of any legislation at the moment . 
the rationale in 1998 would be only a matter of speculation on my part . 
however , I can relay the question to the minister and provide a response in due course . 
senator Tkachuk : 
would the leader undertake to supply in written form an answer as to why there is no legislation and why in September of 1998 the Minister of Finance said that legislation would be required ? 
that point is important because we believed the minister , which caused many committee members to undertake the idea of a letter attached to the bill rather than to pass an amendment in the committee . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will attempt to confirm for the honourable senator whether there is any present intention to introduce legislation . 
transport 
restructuring of Airline Industry - Effect of Air Canada Monopoly 
hon. Donald H . Oliver : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate and it deals with transportation . 
honourable senators on the Senate Transportation Committee did some excellent work in analyzing the decision of the Minister of Transport to suspend section 47 of the Competition Act , which opened the door for the Onex Corporation to attempt a major airline restructuring move . 
in fact , our committee found that there was no reason for Minister Collenette to suspend the rules . 
i was wondering , first , if the minister has such an explanation . 
these are all important issues . 
last week , I asked the minister questions about the Air Canada fare increase and now we are told Air Canada is fiddling with consumers ' air travel points . 
what assurances can the leader give us that Canadians will not be trampled into the ground by the forces of Air Canada ' s monopoly power ? 
who is standing up for the rights of consumers in this restructuring ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with respect to the protection of the Canadian consumer in any dominant carrier situation , the principles which the minister has discussed and I have repeated here on a number of occasions will be brought to bear . 
in our current circumstances a dominant carrier must play by clear rules . 
senator Oliver : 
if Parliament is to rise until some time in February , who will be looking after the store and tending the shop between now and then in the event that these fare increases and point changes continue to take place ? 
who will protect the consumers with respect to those matters ? 
senator Boudreau : 
the regulatory agencies currently in place will continue to have jurisdiction . 
however , the Transport Minister ' s clear commitment has been relayed in the strongest terms to Air Canada . 
i am confident that he will ensure that the consumer remains protected . 
hon. Consiglio Di Nino : 
i wonder if the minister can tell us if any further development has taken place with regard to the comments made by the minister , that foreign carriers may be allowed to operate within the Canadian field , particularly in the area of cabotage ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I cannot add anything to that topic at present . 
i expect the Minister of Transport to come forward shortly with a comprehensive package of measures . 
i am confident that they will follow the principles which he has brought forward on behalf of the government . 
those principles ensure the protection of the consumer . 
senator Di Nino : 
would the minister undertake to obtain an answer for us on the subject of cabotage issue by the time the Senate resumes next year ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I will relay the senator ' s concerns and his request for information . 
whether or not the minister will want to deal specifically and publicly with part of a package or whether or not he wishes to bring forward measures as part of a comprehensive plan , will be up to him . 
national Defence 
replacement of Sea King Helicopter Fleet 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , given the incidents reported in the press in recent months and culminating in the Canadian Press story this morning , citing 10 , 12 or perhaps more incidents of doors , flat parts , rotor patches and other items falling off the Sea King helicopters , perhaps the government does not think about the personnel who must fly these craft . 
i wonder what the people of Halifax West - where the Leader of the Government in the Senate may wish to run federally - think about the Sea Kings flying over their heads . 
despite the Minister of National Defence ' s briefing notes which say it will take eight years to implement the maritime helicopter replacement program , the minister himself says that he can implement a replacement program in five years . 
i accept that time period ; however , there are some conditions that go with such an estimate and I am interested in the minister ' s response . 
i have done a significant amount of research on this question , and I have talked to many people who know precisely what is going on . 
if the government initiates the program before the end of this month , I am told that the date 2005 is possible . 
will the government initiate the program ? 
does it have plans to do so before the end of December of this year ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I happened to notice that article in the paper earlier and suspected that it could come up . 
i read the article carefully and have brought a copy of it with me . 
the senator is quite correct that there are a series of past incidents that we will no doubt hear of again . 
however , there were a series of incidents with respect to the equipment , which reinforces the conclusion that the equipment is old and nearing the end of its useful life . 
i noticed that the article quoted a well - known gentleman in military circles in Halifax , Colin Curleigh , a retired brigadier general . 
Mr. Curleigh confirmed that , in his view , it would be possible to have a replacement for the Sea Kings by the year 2005 . 
Mr. Curleigh did not add the condition that the appropriation would have to proceed before Christmas , at least not in the article . 
however , he did say the initiation could be completed by 2005 . 
i was happy to hear a military expert such as Brigadier General Curleigh confirm information I had received from other sources , that reliability of operation was his concern , as opposed to safety of the individuals . 
to be fair to the honourable senator , he also added that in order for the initiation to be completed by 2005 , it would require a significant amount of political will . 
i take from that that he was probably aware of the fact that the Minister of National Defence has made this subject his top priority . 
i am hopeful that that is the kind of commitment that we need in order to move this program forward . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , there is another condition that goes with that implementation plan . 
while I have the greatest respect for Brigadier General Curleigh , whom I have known , as the minister will suspect , for 25 or 30 years . 
i have been around here a long time . 
i knew Brigadier General Curleigh when he was a junior officer . 
the subject of political will has been raised . 
if we want to initiate this process , we must streamline the process in order to have a choice . 
are we prepared to make the regional industrial benefit sacrifice that might be required in order to achieve that goal ? 
it is vitally important . 
when we talk about safety , we are talking about reliability . 
an armament fixture dropped off a Sea King flying at Shearwater . 
an engine panel fell from a Sea King on August 29 and was discovered only on inspection after landing . 
another Sea King lost a different panel while on a flight between Thunder Bay and Kenora . 
a rescue beacon inadvertently left a chopper on September 24 while it was flying over central Maine . 
there will be a war with the Americans if we are not careful . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the issue the honourable senator raises with respect to procurement serves to illustrate how complicated the process normally is . 
potentially , it can always be a series of trade - offs . 
do you trade speed for the ability to procure within Canada ? 
these are all issues in any military procurement that the Minister of National Defence must consider . 
i do not feel competent to weigh and judge the various factors based on the information I have before me , but I am confident that the minister does that on a routine basis with any procurement . 
he would certainly do it in a procurement as significant as the replacement of the Sea Kings . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , nothing will happen before the end of this year , which means that we will not have in place in five years time the equipment that is so vitally necessary . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would urge the senator not to come to that conclusion . 
i remain optimistic . 
i have had discussions with the Minister of National Defence . 
he has indicated his priorities which I hope will be translated into action . 
health 
increased Spending for Breast Cancer Research 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , speaking of political will , last week it was reported in The Ottawa Citizen that a proposal put to the government to increase spending for breast cancer research and treatment to $ 235 million was rejected in the full knowledge that this is the most common form of cancer to strike women . 
as well , the 1997 Red Book identified breast cancer as one of a handful of critical health issues . 
can the Leader of the Government in the Senate tell us when the government will take this serious illness to heart and do something about it ? 
the government spent $ 1 billion to settle the Pearson airport contracts and $ 764 million to settle contracts as a result of the cancellation six years ago of the EH - 101 helicopters . 
in light of that , how can the government justify denying $ 235 million over five years to women with breast cancer ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the government takes very seriously efforts to combat this disease and relieve the suffering of those who have it . 
i am not specifically familiar with the request to which the honourable senator refers . 
as a matter of fact , I am a little bit confused about exactly what was requested ; whether it was the direct delivery of medical services funded by the federal government or whether it included participation by provincial departments of health . 
unfortunately , I do not have any of that information before me so I am unable to give the honourable senator a full answer . 
senator LeBreton : 
this was covered widely in the media . 
i saw it in The Ottawa Citizen . 
a friend of mine told me they had read about it in The Vancouver Sun . 
the government has ruled out of hand a suggestion of one of its own caucus members , who happens to be a doctor and who obviously understands the seriousness of this illness . 
yet , at the same time , the government has frittered away $ 1.764 billion cancelling contracts . 
how can the government justify that to women who are suffering from breast cancer and their families ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am at a bit of a disadvantage because I do not have the details of that proposal . 
was it research ? 
was it delivery of direct medical services ? 
senator LeBreton : 
it was research . 
senator Boudreau : 
if it was delivery of direct medical services , as a former provincial minister of health I would be puzzled as to how that would work . 
if it was for research , I understand . 
i would also draw the senator ' s attention to the major new research program in health that has been announced and is being funded . 
the proposal for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research is unprecedented in this country in terms of health research . 
one would think that breast cancer would easily be included as part of that major initiative . 
treasury Board 
increase in National Child Benefit - Advancement of Date 
hon. Erminie J . Cohen : 
honourable senators , the Speech from the Throne announced an increase in the National Child Benefit to take effect in 2002 . 
information leaked to the National Post a few weeks ago put the cost of this measure at about $ 650 million in the first year and $ 850 million per year when fully implemented . 
the National Child Benefit goes to Canada ' s poorest families . 
it provides desperately needed money to assist in the cost of food , clothing and shelter . 
even with contingency and prudence factors added in , the government expects to have a $ 5.5 - billion surplus next year . 
are there any valid reasons why the government cannot advance the date of this measure to next year with the increased benefits to Canada ' s poorest families to be reflected in their July 2000 cheques ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I thank the honourable senator for the question and I appreciate the support that she has for the program . 
the government will have a surplus , and we are all very thankful . 
the Minister of Finance deserves a great deal of credit for achievingthe surplus . 
however , how the surplus will be apportioned will be weighed against various needs , I suspect all of them very pressing and worthy . 
i am not sure whether the suggestion of the honourable senator can be entertained at this time , but I will certainly pass it along . 
senator Cohen : 
much of that surplus , honourable senators , has been gathered on the backs of the poor . 
the one drawback of the National Child Benefit is the arrangement that allows the provinces to claw it back from welfare recipients . 
can the government put on hold any expansion of this program and ensure that every penny of the planned increase is paid out , not only to the working poor but to all low - income families ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I must comment on the incorrect suggestion that the surplus has been achieved on the backs of the poor . 
part of the reason for the surplus is our vibrant economy . 
the actual growth rate in our gross national product is unprecedented . 
this did not happen accidentally ; it is the result of solid , sensible , moderate government policies . 
the economy has grown dramatically . 
by exercising discipline in our budgeting , we are at a point where we in Parliament can argue about the priorities we wish to ascribe to a surplus . 
that is a wonderful situation to be in . 
with respect to the specifics of the question , I will not repeat my initial answer , except to say that the suggestions of the honourable senator will be conveyed to the minister in question . 
prime Minister ' s Office 
lieutenant - Governor of Nova Scotia - Appointment of Successor - Possibility of Non - partisan Selection 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , earlier today under Senators ' Statements we heard some praise and comments regarding the replacement of the Lieutenant - Governor of Saskatchewan . That raises the question as to when we might expect a replacement for the Lieutenant - Governor of Nova Scotia who is coming to the end of his term . 
can the minister give us advance notice so that we might prepare some adequate statements to acknowledge this replacement ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am relieved . 
for a moment , I thought the honourable senator was applying for the job . 
his leaving would be a great loss to this institution . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
are there any other candidates from the Senate ? 
senator Boudreau : 
frankly , I have no idea who might be named to replace the incumbent . 
i have not been involved in any discussions to that end . 
no one has asked me who should be appointed to the position . 
thus , having not been asked by anyone , I can only assume that the appointment is not imminent . 
senator Comeau : 
honourable senators , the Leader of the Government in the Senate mentioned that I might be an applicant . 
that might be a good idea . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Comeau : 
given the new direction that the Premier of Nova Scotia , the Honourable Dr. Hamm , has taken in trying to reduce the incidence of partisan appointments in Nova Scotia , could we have an indication or a commitment from the minister that the Prime Minister might choose to ask the Premier and members of the legislature to make this one of the first non - partisan appointments in the country ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , if the honourable senator ' s suggestion were taken up , I wonder if it would be one of the first non - partisan appointments made in this country by any Prime Minister of any political persuasion . 
i am merely speculating on the meaning of the question . 
we can be assured that the Prime Minister , in selecting the new Lieutenant - Governor of Nova Scotia , will seek an individual of high quality and integrity . 
i am confident those will be his first criterion . 
i am also confident that he will consult , however , I will not speculate on the formal structures of that consultation . 
i would be extremely surprised if some discussion did not occur with , for example , the Premier of the province anong others . 
we can be assured that , whenever the appointment is made , the position will be filled with a Canadian , perhaps even a Nova Scotian , of the very highest character . 
orders OF THE DAY 
business of the Senate 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I request that Item No. 2 on the Order Paper , which is the consideration of Bill C - 21 , be the first item to be called . 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1999 - 2000 
second Reading 
honourable senators , Bill C - 21 , also known as Appropriations Act No. 3 , 1999 - 2000 , will provide supply in the total amount of $ 3.86 billion as set out in Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 1999 - 2000 . 
these Supplementary Estimates ( A ) are the first for the fiscal year that will end on March 31 , 2000 , and are consistent with the spending estimates presented in the February 16 , 1999 budget . 
honourable senators will recall that the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 1999 - 2000 were introduced in the Senate on November 16 , 1999 . On November 17 , the Senate referred them to the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
our committee subsequently met on November 23 and November 30 . 
on December 2 , the committee reported on the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) to the Senate in the National Finance Committee ' s second report . 
senators will recall that , at the adoption of that report on December 8 , last week , I mentioned that these Estimates had been examined in some detail and that our committee had heard from Treasury Board Secretariat officials Richard Neville and Andrew Lieff , who appeared before the committee on November 23 . 
as always , the committee found their testimony to be very helpful and most informative . 
i shall now describe some of the major items that had not been specifically identified or sufficiently developed at the time of the Main Estimates 1999 - 2000 , and which now seek Parliament ' s approval in Bill C - 21 . 
these funds will provide for the financial requirements for departments and agencies to directly ensure Y 2 K system compliance , and also for international preparedness , central coordination and contingency planning . 
another major item is $ 485.7 million to 65 departments and agencies under the carry - forward provision to meet operational requirements originally provided for in 1998 - 99 . 
this carry - forward provision is a feature of the government ' s approach , intended to reduce year - end spending and improve cash management of operating budgets . 
this provision allows managers to carry forward , from one fiscal year to the next , an amount of up to 5 per cent of the operating budget of the previous fiscal year . 
the operating budget includes salaries , operating expenses and minor capital expenditures . 
another major item is $ 482.5 million to six departments and agencies to coordinate Canada ' s activities in respect of the conflict in Kosovo . 
canada has been part of the international community ' s efforts in this crisis since it began in February 1998 . Since the situation deteriorated rapidly in March 1999 , Canada has been active , diplomatically and militarily , and in the humanitarian response to the refugee crisis . 
some $ 199.4 million is for the Treasury Board Secretariat to distribute funds to departments and agencies to compensate them for the impact of the collective bargaining agreements concluded to date , as well as other related adjustments . 
collective bargaining was resumed in early 1997 . 
these funds represent the retroactive and ongoing incremental salary costs for 1999 - 2000 . 
there is $ 149.5 million to the Departments of National Defence and Veterans Affairs in response to the recommendations of the House of Commons Standing Committee on National Defence and Veterans Affairs which had examined the issues affecting the lives and families of Canadian Forces ' personnel . 
this strategy encompasses many initiatives including summer employment , internships for First Nations and Inuit youth , with a focus on international trade and development , science and technology , and other related youth programs . 
there is $ 112.2 million to four departments and agencies for the Canadian Fisheries Adjustment and Restructuring measures intended to address the impact on East Coast communities and individuals of the end of the Atlantic Groundfish Strategy . 
it is also intended to introduce adjustment and restructuring measures for the West Coast salmon fishery . 
honourable senators , I move now to the major items that affect sole departments or agencies . 
they include $ 108 million to Human Resources Development Canada for the Canada Jobs Fund which reflects the government ' s continuing commitment in addressing the problems of Canadians in those regions of high unemployment . 
this department will work in close partnership with other levels of government , the private sector , regional developments agencies and community organizations in stimulating employment . 
an amount of $ 84.1 million goes to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade to provide certain provinces with a share of the revenues collected from fees paid by softwood lumber exporters . 
Canadian Heritage receives $ 70 million to enhance the officials languages support programs by increasing direct support for the development of minority communities and funding for federal - provincial agreements , mainly in the area of minority and second - language education . 
honourable senators , the only non - budgetary item is $ 50 million to the Department of National Defence for a temporary increase to the working capital advance account in order to meet the department ' s pay requirements for Canadian personnel deployed outside of Canada in case of Y 2 K cash difficulty transition . 
i shall now provide some information on changes to the projected statutory spending . 
the major statutory items to which there are adjustments in the projected spending amounts are as follows : 
there is an increase of $ 179.5 million to Agriculture and Agri - Food Canada for payments to producers under the various components of the Farm Income Protection Act . 
the primary purpose of these programs is to provide an agricultural safety net to help producers stabilize incomes and manage risks . 
many of these programs are delivered by the provinces or by provincial agencies or corporations . 
there is an increase of $ 182.3 million to the Department of Finance for provincial equalization payments . 
this increase reflects changes in the forecasts upon which these payments are based , such as the provincial basis , its population and tax revenues . 
there is a minor decrease of $ 108.5 million from the $ 12.5 billion forecast in the Main Estimates for the Department of Finance for the Canada Health and Social Transfer Payment to the provinces . 
this is in recognition of a corresponding increase in the value of the tax component of the transfer flowing from higher - than - expected personal income and corporate tax yields . 
this transfer provides financial support to the provinces for health , post - secondary education , social assistance and social services . 
there is an increase of $ 79 million to the Department of Finance for alternative payments for standing programs to offset higher recoveries than forecasted in the Main Estimates . 
the higher level of recoveries reflect higher personal income and other tax payments . 
honourable senators , these items which I have just described represent an overall increase of $ 174.3 million which , when offset by a decrease of $ 3.2 million distributed among a number of other departments and agencies mentioned in these Supplementary Estimates ( A ) for 1999 - 2000 , amount to a net increase of $ 171.1 million . 
honourable senators , I thank our committee ' s new chairman , Senator Lowell Murray , for his diligence and hard work and very practised eye . 
i would also like to thank a senior senator , a renewed member to our committee , Senator Doody , who occupies the distinguished position of having been a chairman of this particular committee at one point in his career . 
having said all of that honourable senators and having extended all my gracious appreciation to all the members for their good and practised work , I take this opportunity to urge all honourable senators to grant supply to Her Majesty and to Her Majesty ' s government by passing Bill C - 21 , so that the Government of Canada may proceed to do its business . 
hon. Lowell Murray : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Cools for her kind words . 
let me reciprocate but in no perfunctory manner by thanking her for that comprehensive and detailed explanation of this supply bill . 
she has made my job a good deal easier . 
honourable senators , let me say a word for the record about the context in which we in the Senate consider these measures . 
of course , we have the constitutional right to amend or even to defeat any bill that comes before us . 
nevertheless , the Senate has recognized that the granting of supply , the imposition of taxes , financial measures in general , are among the most jealously guarded prerogatives of the House of Commons . 
in the evolving post - war Senate , we have found a way to exercise our responsibilities as a co - equal chamber of this Parliament while , at the same time , respecting the prerogatives of the House of Commons in these matters . 
therefore , we proceed first of all by referring the Estimates to the National Finance Committee . 
the Standing Senate Committee on National Finance does not necessarily examine all programs . 
it tries to examine federal public spending from the point of view of administrative policy in particular , so that its mandate cannot be limited . 
the mandate must be general with respect to votes and forecasts , but this does not prevent a Senate committee - 
he means another Senate committee . 
normally , the Estimates are referred to The Standing Senate Committee on National Finance . 
the committee examines them and reports on them to the Senate . 
then we , the Senate , normally expedite the supply bill which comes from the House of Commons , usually shortly thereafter . 
i draw the attention of honourable senators to our report where the committee flagged a number of important matters . 
senator Cools mentioned the $ 0.5 billion demanded by the government in Supplementary Estimates to deal with the Y 2 K issue . 
we also flagged the write - off of loans to foreign governments . 
the committee ' s view was that the government ought to develop a set of criteria which could guide us in judging the appropriateness of any specific loan forgiveness in the future . 
it would also be nice to see some relationship adduced between yesterday ' s loan forgiveness and tomorrow ' s borrowing policy : but that is a personal editorial comment which I am throwing in on my own initiative . 
this brings to approximately $ 132 million the amount required in the present fiscal year for that purpose , of which $ 70 million seems to be going to the new Canadian quarters in Berlin . 
we would like to know where the other $ 60 million is going ; and the department has promised to enlighten us on this point at a later date . 
we wait with bated breath . 
the question of recovering the costs incurred by the government for the inquest into the crash of the Swissair flight off the coast of Nova Scotia was raised . 
senator Ferretti Barth has long insisted that the government should be encouraged to continue to claim compensation from Swissair . 
in the long term , the committee feels that the relevant articles of the Chicago Convention should be changed so that air carriers and their insurers will be obliged to take some responsibility for inquests and the clean - up from air accidents . 
we noted that Canada is particularly vulnerable financially because there are more flights in its airspace than in the airspace of other countries . 
this is a matter of the utmost concern to us , and Senator Ferretti Barth is right in requesting that the Department of Foreign Affairs look into it as soon as possible . 
honourable senators , the increase in funds needed for the firearms control program certainly caught our attention at the committee , and Senator Tkachuk raised this issue in Question Period a few days after the committee met . 
one other matter among many that we flagged , and I would draw your attention to the entire report , is this whole question of payments under the Crown Liabilities Act . 
this is one of Senator Doody ' s favourite subjects , and he pressed it , I thought very effectively , as did a number of other colleagues during our committee hearings . 
the point raised by Senator Doody was to the effect that we could find no provision in the Estimates for the pay equity case which the government had , not to put too fine a point on it , lost in the courts . 
i think all of us accept that that is a prudent thing for the government to do . 
in this case , they squirreled the money away in the vote for salaries and benefits where , obviously , it could not be detected by anyone . 
the officials made it clear to us that , if questions had been raised in the interim , they would have ducked them . 
obviously , if it were known how much the government were squirrelling away against the possibility of losing the case , then the government ' s legal , not to say political , position would be that much more vulnerable . 
we understand the context in which the government has quietly put money away and does not want to quantify the amount before the dreaded day arrives when they must pay it out . 
that being said , however , over a period of years , the government put some hundreds of millions of dollars away , so much per year , in the salaries and benefits vote . 
none of us detected it , and none of us asked any questions about it . 
now that the case is almost over - the government has some other hoops to go through - the government will now , through section 30 of the Crown Liabilities Act , pay the money out . 
neither first nor last does Parliament ever get a chance to pronounce on the matter or to discuss the amount that is being paid , how it is being paid , why it is being paid , what the policy of the government is , and so on and so forth . 
this is a question that exercised our best minds at the committee - Senator Bolduc , Senator Doody , Senator Cools , Senator Moore and others . 
i should not single these people out because all of the members of the committee took a very keen interest in this matter . 
we flagged this as another matter that we intend to consider at a later date . 
to what effect , I cannot predict , but I think it is an important matter . 
honourable senators , having listened to the speech that has been given by our friend Senator Cools , if you glance at or still better read the report that the committee brought in on the Supplementary Estimates that form the basis of this supply bill , then I hope you will agree that the committee did a thorough job on these Estimates and that you can vote for this bill in good conscience . 
motion agreed to and bill read second time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read a third time ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , as we know , one day ' s notice is required to proceed to third reading of a bill , but I believe that there is a genuine consensus on both sides of the chamber to proceed to third reading now . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
No. 
senator Murray : 
i do not think it would be possible to give leave . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
leave is not granted . 
on motion of Senator Cools , bill placed on the Orders of the Day for third reading at the next sitting of the Senate . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Gauthier , for the third reading of Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , Bill S - 3 was referred to two committees . 
i will not comment on any actions taken or scrutiny given by the Banking Committee regarding this bill . 
at first blush , Bill S - 3 is , essentially , a bill for the avoidance of double taxation bill . 
it covers a number of countries with which we intend to trade and to invest in , and therefore it is in the interests of both Canada and the reciprocal country to have such legislation . 
bills dealing with the avoidance double taxation , honourable senators , are not unique . 
they have been coming before Parliament for some considerable time . 
as officials from the revenue agency indicated , they scrutinize two issues to ensure that citizens who do business in other countries are not taxed twice . 
the purpose of double taxation bills is to ensure that tax avoidance is not accomplished . 
bills of this type give the government more levers to ensure that income which should be taxed in fact is taxed . 
however , I am indebted that Bill S - 3 received the kind of scrutiny that other bills in the past did not receive and should have received . 
there is one notable exception , and that is the agreement for the avoidance of taxation that was dealt with in the Foreign Affairs Committee , as opposed to the Banking Committee , in May of 1998 . If my memory is correct , that agreement covered countries such as Croatia , Chile and Vietnam . 
the Foreign Affairs Committee expressed real concern that the issue should not be taxation only but that the issue of dealing with legislation must be taken in light of all aspects of foreign policy . 
as honourable senators know , once we deal with a country , we are in many cases co - opted into their structures , values andattitudes . 
at the time of the committee ' s review , Senator Di Nino and other members - I believe Senator Grafstein as well - raised concerns that we need assurances that the countries with which we sign agreements for the avoidance of taxation have appropriate structures in place , such as an independent judiciary . 
they must adhere to the rule of law . 
honourable senators , great emphasis was placed on the issue of confidentiality . 
if businesses are to go overseas and be obliged to disclose their inner finances and workings to another country because of an agreement dealing with the avoidance of double taxation , we must be certain that those countries use that information only for the purposes contemplated in the taxation agreement and not for other issues . 
i know from experience that there is no such thing as confidentiality in many other countries . 
if one department receives certain information , they are less mindful of the rules of procedure , confidentiality and respect for the rights of individual citizens . 
fortunately , those countries are diminishing in number , but they are still of concern . 
in May of 1998 , although we passed the bill dealing with the avoidance of double taxation , we raised the issue that the Department of Foreign Affairs should make a complete analysis as to whether the country with which we are to sign an agreement for the avoidance of double taxation has a good human rights record , proper constitutional capacities , practices and procedures , and a proven track record . 
we must be assured that we are not impacting our citizens and their citizens in a negative way by signing the agreement , . 
that comment was made in this chamber . 
we signalled to the Department of Foreign Affairs and the other ministries involvedthat all agreements of this type should be reviewed in that light . 
honourable senators , my comments to officials of the Department of Foreign Affairs were that no avoidance - of - taxation bill should come before Parliament without a full and complete analysis of the capability and the human rights record of the country in question . 
we were assured that this analysis was in keeping with what the government of the day deemed to be good practice . 
however , our suggestions in respect of that bill appear not to have been followed . 
i am very pleased that Senator Lynch - Staunton forcefully raised the issue of human rights , and this chamber should be indebted to him . 
he questioned to which committee this bill would be sent . 
would it be dealt with strictly by the Banking Committee , or would it be more logically dealt with by the Foreign Affairs Committee ? 
i am pleased that this chamber referred the matter to the Foreign Affairs Committee . 
in his remarks , Senator Lynch - Staunton indicated that we in this chamber should bridge the gap between our fine words about human rights and our actions on a day - to - day basis . 
i believe we should take those comments into account . 
we in this chamber take great pride in our reports . 
passing these reports unanimously gives me some confidence that we believe that the policy statements and the recommendations made in our reports have value and should find resonance in the government of the day . 
at page 97 of our Asia - Pacific report , we indicated that foreign policy takes into account factors supporting adherence to human rights issues , such as good governance , democratization and civil society , the rule of law and the need for an independent judiciary . 
this is not an exhaustive list , but these factors should be taken into account before we enter into arrangements and relationships with other countries . 
at page 109 of our report , we talked about principles for a coherent Canadian human rights policy . 
it has become increasingly clear that issues of trade and investment ought not to be discussed in isolation from human rights and democracy . 
we noted in our report an address given by the Honourable Lloyd Axworthy , where he indicated that human rights and foreign policy led to a principled and pragmatic approach to international trade and foreign affairs . 
therefore , as the committee indicated in its report , trade and investment do not stand alone . 
they are to be judged with human rights . 
it is extremely important , honourable senators , that the Government of Canada and the projection of Canada ' s image in the world lead to a systematic , consistent and principled approach to human rights . 
human rights must not be dealt with separate from other issues . 
human rights permeates all of agendas and all legislation . 
we must look at all of the issues . 
in the Foreign Affairs Committee , officials from the new revenue agency said that , quite frankly , they only looked at the two issues of tax avoidance and double taxation because that is their mandate . 
however , one of the difficulties is that we no longer have a revenue department . 
it is not bound by the same practices and principles by which a normal ministry is bound . 
the employees of the revenue department do not have the same responsibilities . 
i point this out because in the introductory chapter of the Auditor General ' s report of November 1999 , at page 18 , the Auditor General stated : 
i am concerned , however , that the government has not given proper attention to the implications for accountability and good governance . 
by their very nature , these arrangements challenge the traditional accountability relationship that sees ministers answerable to Parliament for their policies and programs and , through Parliament , to citizens at large . 
since other parties are also involved in these arrangements , ministers are never wholly responsible for them . 
in some cases , arrangements have intentionally been set up to be totally independent from ministers , even though they may depend on federal funds and federal authority . 
without appropriate accountability and good governance mechanisms , these arrangements can erode the ability of Parliament to scrutinize the use of federal power and the right of citizens to accountable government . 
the revenue agency implements taxation policy . 
they have a strict mandate which they follow . 
when they were questioned as to whether they considered issues such as human rights , good governance and constitutional capacity , they indicated that they take their cue from foreign affairs . 
if the Department of Foreign Affairs indicates that there is a diplomatic relationship with a government , the revenue agency does not go beyond that . 
that is not their mandate , so far . 
therefore , the Department of Foreign Affairs is the agency that should be scrutinizing these countries to determine whether or not they are the types of countries with which we should be signing international instruments . 
from the testimony of the foreign affairs officials , it is clear that there is not an independent and systematic process in place in their department to ensure that the countries that we are signing double taxation agreements with are countries with which we wish to deepen and broaden our relationships . 
senator Lynch - Staunton used the example of Uzbekistan . 
the record of Uzbekistan is not exemplary . 
Uzbekistan suffers from the legacy of the Soviet Union . 
it has made some changes , but certainly not significant changes in its governance . 
there have been human rights abuses , and there continue to be human rights abuses in Uzbekistan that should worry us . 
on the other hand , Uzbekistan has signed international covenants where their officials indicate that they will respect human rights . 
that is at least an indication that they will allow some international scrutiny of their internal practices . 
they have been left an appalling legacy , environmentally and politically , from the Soviet Union . 
my concern is that no one has given the countries covered by Bill S - 3 a systematic examination . 
i do not know how other countries , for example , Algeria , Bulgaria , Jordan , Japan , Lebanon and Luxembourg . stack up against Uzbekistan and I do not know how they stack up against a world standard on human rights . 
i do not know what principles or practices are used to adjudge whether or not they are countries with which we should be dealing . 
it would seem that no one has made the proper analysis . 
while I respect that we should have agreements for the avoidance of double taxation , I firmly believe that we should not single out any country until we have scrutinized it and are satisfied that it meets our good governance standards . 
it would be unfair to single out one country on the list in Bill S - 3 without having had some systematic assessment of all the countries with which we have such agreements . 
as you know , Portugal and Luxembourg , for example , are , with Canada , member countries in NATO and the OECD which means that we can have some assurance of their policies . 
canada has always relied on the Universal Declaration and we attempt to judge all countries against a similar standard . 
we do not single out any country as an example . 
when we do not deal with a country or cease to have a relationship with a country , we do it because there are certain principles upon which we have adjudged them to have failed the test . 
it is clear from our analysis of Bill S - 3 that the government has not put those standards in place . 
the government has not respected the committee ' s previous requests for such standards . 
therefore , it would be unfair to single out these countries at this time . 
i do not think that we should judge countries randomly . 
it should be done consistently and systematically . 
that stamp addresses the issue of human rights , good governance , the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary of which I have spoken . 
we are also sending the message to those citizens that they must abide by the double taxation rule and that they must provide financial information to another country . 
we must ensure that , when we sign these agreements and send the signal to businesses that we recognize that they may go abroad , we have some measurable way to ensure that the information of our businesses is not used in nefarious ways , and that our citizens are not vulnerable to the kinds of attacks or treatment that would be of a standard lower than they should expect in Canada . 
honourable senators , I have made the point more than once , and I hope I have made it forcefully : 
bill S - 3 illustrates that we have failed the test . 
therefore , it would be very difficult for me to say that others have failed the test . 
we must get our house in order . 
minister Axworthy talks about principled foreign policy ; and those are fine words . 
i am looking to the Government of Canada and the Department of Foreign Affairs to put those words into practice so that when the next double taxation bill comes before us , government officials can assure that a standard has been set , and that the countries with which we are signing agreements meet those standards . 
hon. Nicholas W . Taylor : 
honourable senators , I have listened with interest to the experienced words of Senator Andreychuk . 
although I only recently joined the Foreign Affairs Committee , in my business experiences I operated in approximately 20 countries in the world . 
i recognize that it is not as easy as it might sound to sit in this chamber and call for moral and human rights standards in other countries and to measure them against our yardstick . 
it reminds me of the old Greek story of Procrustes . 
when guests in the house were too tall for the bed , he cut off their feet , and if they were too short , he put them on the rack to stretch them . 
in some ways , this is the type of argument that I hear coming from the other side , namely , that the country must fit our Procrustean bed or we should not be dealing with them . 
we must examine a few areas , not only human rights but the environment and trade . 
through the years , my observation has been that the best way to get good ideas to flow is through trade . 
it might have started back when the Portuguese began travelling into Africa , Asia and so on . 
senator Andreychuk : 
that brought us slavery ! 
senator Taylor : 
yes , many bad ideas came across into the New World , too . 
however , trade seemed to be the one way to improve human rights and human activity in each area . 
it was good . 
you cannot compare what went on in the 1500 s with today . 
we have progressed , and much of that progression seemed to come about through trade , not by countries sitting back and saying that we are better than others and that we will not associate with other countries unless they become as good as we are . 
that is a suspicious way of approaching the subject . 
if it is progressing but still short of the level we want , we should encourage them by continuing to trade with them . 
however , it if is regressing and taking away rights that the people had a generation earlier , then perhaps we should use trade as an instrument to try to bring them around , to get them to give more benefits to their society , in both the fields of environment and human rights . 
perhaps because I am a geologist by background , I feel that we have to determine if they are evolving or regressing . 
if a state is evolving to higher standards , even though they are not at the level we are at , it may be worthwhile dealing with them . 
the honourable senator talked about Uzbekistan . 
we have both been over in that part of the world . 
it is a dirty trick , in a way , to pick on Uzbekistan , because they sit next to Afghanistan , which is ruled by the Taliban movement . 
i would defy even Canada to be very tolerant if we had Taliban fighters right on our borders , going back and forth across the mountains . 
we must remember the problems that the government of Uzbekistan faces . 
they are not dealing with a nice , peaceful group such as the Conservatives , the NDP , or the Liberals ; they do not operate on the same wavelength . 
therefore , to say that they should be using the same system is a bit unfair . 
my personal opinion is that Uzbekistan is coming along quite well . 
having spent time in Iran and Afghanistan , I think that Uzbekistan is light - years ahead of them in some ways . 
to return to the point , it becomes difficult to measure how people are progressing . 
we can really only look at whether they are evolving , and remember the historic importance of trade since time immemorial . 
if you go back to the first Greek writers who wrote about Greek influence in Africa , you will learn that trade has been the vehicle by which culture and ideas flowed from one area to another . 
you must have the faith that if the ideas and the culture are good , they will ultimately survive , rather than the evil ideas or evil cultures that are moving a society backward with respect to human rights . 
in general , honourable senators , although there may be a few steps backward , mankind seems to evolve , and the instrument through which that evolution takes place is trade . 
sometimes that is preceded or followed by missionaries but , nearly always , trade is the ultimate , unbiased means by which ideas and culture flow . 
i question anyone or any group that tries to tell us in Canada that we should not deal with this or that country because the country is not up to a certain standard . 
i still think that , in the long run , trade will make for a better world and a better Canada . 
senator Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , would Senator Taylor entertain a question ? 
senator Taylor : 
certainly , although I am very busy tonight . 
senator Andreychuk : 
i am sure the question will not take too long . 
the honourable senator is making the argument that I heard five years ago from the government , namely , that trade stands alone and we do not mix in human rights issues . 
in recent times , though , Minister Axworthy has clearly stated that there is a link between human rights and trade . 
the honourable senator rightly pointed out something with which I agree , which is that you should look to see whether a country is doing better or attempting to do better on its human rights record , or is regressing . 
my question is in two parts . 
first , does the honourable senator therefore not believe that the government ' s policy of linkage is correct ? 
second , does he not think that the standard I was talking about was equivalent to the principles he mentioned , that is , whether a country is moving ahead in human rights or regressing ? 
senator Taylor : 
honourable senators , I am glad the honourable senator recognized the concept that , if countries are evolving and moving ahead , we should measure them with a different yardstick than if they are regressing or taking away rights . 
certainly , the ultimate weapon of trade is through sanctions . 
we have used trade sanctions in Africa , although some will argue that they did not do much good . 
we used sanctions in Bosnia , and in some ways that caused the problem in Kosovo . 
i do not want to sound like a rebel here , but I do not link trade and human rights as tightly as the honourable senator says our Foreign Affairs Minister links them . 
i am not quite that far along . 
let us look at our relationship with China . 
we do a lot of business with China and make lots of money out of that trade , but the standard there seems to be different from the one we are using for Uzbekistan where we buy only a few hides . 
in other words , we have to be careful that a large economy in certain areas does not hide all sorts of ill effects . 
i still think trade is the ultimate way to improve those situations . 
the Foreign Affairs Minister has not proven to me that any area is better because we cut them off from trading with us . 
on motion of Senator Lynch - Staunton , debate adjourned . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , it is now 3:30 , and by order of the Senate , the Senate will now adjourn until 2 p.m. tomorrow . 
the Senate adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 
debates of the Senate ( Hansard ) 
2 nd Session , 36 th Parliament , 
volume 138 , Issue 23 
Thursday , December 16 , 1999 
the Honourable Gildas L . Molgat , Speaker 
table of Contents 
senators ' STATEMENTS 
tributes on Retirement 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from October 13 to 15 , 1999 
contributions of Prominent Canadian Women 
the Senate 
condition of Senator Willie Adams 
visitors in the Gallery 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
security and Intelligence 
government Response to Report of Special Committee Tabled 
state of Domestic and International Financial System 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Study Presented 
internal Economy , Budget and Administration 
third Report of Committee Tabled 
national Defence Act DNA Identification Act Criminal Code 
report of Committee 
statistics Act National Archives of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
report of Canadian Group on 102 nd Inter - Parliamentary Conference Held in Berlin , Germany Tabled 
report of Canadian Group on 54 th Session of United Nations General Assembly Held in New York Tabled 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Delegation to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from October 13 to 15 , 1999 
canada - France Inter - Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Group on 29 th Annual Meeting from September 8 to 15 , 1999 Tabled 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
report of Canadian Group on 102 nd Inter - Parliamentary Conference Held in Berlin , Germany - Notice of Inquiry 
question PERIOD 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Response to Report of House of Commons Committee 
plight of Western Grain Farmers 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Request for Response by Prime Minister 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Ontario - Regional Restructuring Legislation - Legal Process Required to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
transport 
Halifax International Airport Authority Agreement - Obligation by Federal Government to Control Acidity of Slate 
aboriginal Peoples 
request for Response to Committee Report on Aboriginal Veterans 
orders OF THE DAY 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1999 - 2000 
third Reading 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading 
Nisga ' a Final Agreement Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
royal ASSENT 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Order Stands 
official Languages 
second Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
scrutiny of Regulations 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discusssions on Private sector proposal to purchase airline - report of transport and communications committee on study adopted 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Inquiry - Debated Suspended 
royal ASSENT 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee on Study Adopted 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Study State of Heath Care System 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
aboriginal Peoples Committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study 
the Senate 
motion in Support of Declaring Ottawa Officially Bilingual Adopted 
Christmas Wishes 
adjournment 
the SENATE 
Thursday , December 16 , 1999 
the Senate met at 2:00 p.m. , the Speaker in the Chair . 
prayers . 
tributes on Retirement 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I should like to say a special Senate farewell to a man whom I am proud to be able to call a friend , our retiring Deputy Clerk , Richard Greene . 
i would not want Richard to leave without saying publicly how much I have relied on the wisdom , knowledge and skill he offered so generously to me long before I ever entered the Senate . 
i was reading his resum é yesterday and noted that he started his career in this place as a page in 1956 . 
that was the same year I set out from Lethbridge on an adventure that would take me and other young Canadian and American students all across this country and down to the United Nations for a week . 
i was 16 years old and had never been east of Medicine Hat . 
clearly , both of us were bitten by the bug that exists within these walls , and it has become the workplace of a lifetime . 
the first priority , of course , was to meet someone named Jean Sutherland , who was widely and respectfully regarded as , I quote , " the lady who runs the Senate . " 
from what I could gather at the time , she seemed to be a key element that kept this place purring along . 
jean Sutherland had a young assistant who knew pretty much everything about how the Senate operated , what was happening with legislation , and the pitfalls that might befall a careless government if it did not keep its mind on the right course of consultation and cooperation . 
he was there also to keep people like myself from bothering Jean Sutherland , so he had to know everything that she did . 
that person , of course , was Richard Greene . 
apart from all the skill that Richard possessed , he was also a wonderful guy , and we became cheerful friends at once , in spite of the fact that I was usually calling him when something was threatening to move down the wrong track . 
i would venture to say that the Senate of Canada has never had as loyal an employee as Richard Greene . 
whatever the pressures , his focus has always been on ensuring this place was functioning correctly and not on the political preoccupations of its inhabitants , to whatever party they might belong . 
in my experience , he has never lost his patience or his sense of humour , which is more than I can say for myself . 
i am sad that he has chosen to leave us , but I know that his real family - Ethel , Lesley and Steven - will be delighted to become the focus of his attention . 
i simply assure Richard that our friendship will never end . 
i wish him all the best in the new challenges and adventures life has in store for him . 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , when Richard Greene arrived here in 1956 , he arrived with a newly appointed group of senators that included the likes of Chubby Power , David Croll , Hartland Molson , Muriel McQueen Fergusson and my father , Harold Connolly . 
at about the same time that he began his wanders through this chamber , I began my wanders through this chamber because I came frequently with my father during those early years of his appointment . 
i am not sure if Richard knows this , but I was responsible for one black Cadillac hitting another black Cadillac out in front of the Senate entrance , when Senator Basha ' s wife insisted that I drive Senator Basha ' s Cadillac . 
he and I will both remember that in those days there was still some work going on within the chamber corridors with regard to sculpting . 
up would go the scaffolding and down would come the scaffolding , and a new gargoyle would appear overnight . 
those are the memories I have as a 12 - to 15 - year - old girl wandering around this place . 
those memories , I share with Richard Greene . 
honourable senators , there is a special relationship between the Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate and the position filled by Richard - that is , until he announced his retirement . 
each day , at a time usually around 10 a.m. or 11 a.m. , Richard Greene would arrive in the deputy leader ' s office with " the scroll . " 
many senators do not know what the scroll is , but it is those long pieces of paper held by the Deputy Leader of the Government and the Leader of the Opposition . 
it shows what will happen in this chamber . 
Richard and I would sit down together and decide whether it was right for the day . 
by that , I mean that Michelle MacDonald , my assistant , would take great pleasure in finding Richard ' s mistakes . 
we did not find them very often , but when we did , we would have a great chuckle that the document had not arrived in its usual pristine form . 
Michelle joins me in saying how much we miss those daily occurrences in my office . 
Richard was a professional to the end . 
he had an amazing capacity to listen , to take note of what he heard , and to do everything he could to make life just a bit easier - not only for the deputy leader and the leader of the Senate but also for every other senator in this chamber . 
i needed his support and help , and he gave it to me willingly , and with affection and good humour . 
i thank you for those years in which we worked together , Richard . 
you will be missed . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , there is an underlying plot here that we did not see . 
i think Mr. Greene was highly inspired by that event . 
honourable senators , I cannot believe that the senior staff member of both Houses would drop me like this . 
with his departure , I will now become the second longest - serving person here - that is , after Herb Gray on the other side . 
Mr. Greene and I have travelled and worked together . 
Mr. Greene and his wife were very kind to one of my sisters when we travelled together , and we became friends . 
i have not prepared notes , honourable senators , because I did not want my remarks to become merely functional and official . 
we will miss Richard , but I still believe that , ultimately , he will not leave this place . 
look at him now , smiling and enjoying all the good words that we are saying about him . 
that is what I am hoping he will do . 
nevertheless , in case he does decide to leave this place , I want him to know that I , for one , will always be his friend . 
on behalf of all honourable senators , I should like to personally offer to him and to his wife our very best . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from October 13 to 15 , 1999 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
the history and theory of economic regionalism came alive at the Nantes conference through the creative leadership of our good friend Jacques Floch , the distinguished member of the National Assembly of France . 
when Jacques , Chairman of the Economic Committee of the OSCE , invited me , as deputy chairman of that committee , to describe the unique region of Canada , none was more appealing than Canada ' s North . 
examine the globe from the top down and you will see that the circumpolar region is the largest untapped , unmapped region in the world . 
you will notice that North America and Europe are close geographic neighbours . 
the United States lies only a narrow waterway away from Russia , the former land bridge called the Bering Strait . 
you will recall the early dreams of a northwest passage to China , which first excited the earliest explorers from Jacques Cartier , who left for Canada over five centuries ago from Saint - Malo , up the coast from Nantes , where we held our meeting . 
on closer examination , the northwest sea passage , transversing the top of the globe , is 2,200 to 2,900 nautical miles in length , depending on the exact route . 
as co - chair of the Canada - U.S. Inter - Parliamentary Group , I attended a conference in Washington when Senator Murkowski of Alaska , our U.S. co - chair , painted an exciting vision he had sketched at our meeting at Quebec City earlier this year in Canada . 
he proposed that Canada and the U.S. combine to create a north - south rail link between Alaska , the Yukon and British Columbia in Canada , all the way to the U.S. border , by completing 900 miles of rail link . 
senator Murkowski went on to project a further rail link beyond the Arctic Coast . 
this new rail link could ultimately connect with a tunnel under the Bering Strait to mainland Russia . 
Eurasia and North America are just 50 miles apart at this point and almost touch each other like two fingers reaching out . 
thus , a rail link - even a road link - between Russia , the United States and Canada could be established with technology developed in Europe for the " chunnel " . 
imagine boarding a train from London to Paris , travelling via rail on a high - speed trans - Siberian express across Russia to the Pacific Coast , continuing by tunnel under the Bering Strait to Alaska , then swiftly moving south through the Yukon to British Columbia , to Vancouver in Canada , and then south to Hollywood or east to New York City or Halifax on the Atlantic Coast . 
all this will be economically feasible early in the next century . 
it could transform the strategic platform of the world economy and alter dramatically strategic and economic relationships . 
once again , I wish to thank Jacques Floch of France for inspiring us to imagine a northern vision for the 21 st century , spawning new economic partnerships for the benefit of all citizens of the globe . 
i take this opportunity to wish all senators a merry new millennium . 
contributions of Prominent Canadian Women 
hon. Lucie P é pin : 
honourable senators , the century that is coming to a close has seen some major changes for the women of Canada in all spheres of activity . 
these changes would have been impossible without the untiring efforts of a number of truly exceptional women , women who were not afraid to work untiringly for social justice and change , in the face of strong opposition . 
as a society , we owe them a great deal . 
on the eve of a new millennium , it is only right for us to call them to mind and to pay tribute to them . 
time prevents me from mentioning them all . 
in naming the small number I will today , my heartfelt appreciation is extended to all Canadian women who have made an impact on women ' s equality over the last century . 
this year , we are celebrating the 70 th anniversary of the Persons case . 
no one could speak of the changes in women ' s lives without referring to the Famous Five : 
Irene Parlby , Nellie McClung , Emily Murphy , Henriette Muir Edwards and Louise McKinney , who succeeded in having the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council declare that the term " person " in the British North America Act included women , and that women could be appointed to the Senate . 
and what about Agnes MacPhail , the first woman elected to the House of Commons in 1921 ? 
without her and the Famous Five , how many of us women would be here today ? 
th é r è se Casgrain was the first Canadian woman to lead a political party . 
between 1942 and 1962 , she was elected nine times to federal and provincial legislative assemblies . 
Jeanette Viviane Corbiere Lavell is another exceptional woman who devoted her life to defending the rights of native women . 
in 1971 , she challenged section 12 of the Indian Act , which decreed that native women who married non - natives lost their native status . 
the Supreme Court ruled against her , but Sandra Lovelace decided to take the case to the UN Human Rights Commission , and the Indian Act was amended in 1985 . 
there is also Madeleine Parent , who was active for 40 years in Quebec ' s union movement . 
in 1942 , she presided over the unionization of Dominion Textiles ' garment factories , where most employees were women . 
nor should we forget the late Senator Yvette Rousseau , who was one of the pioneers in unionizing the garment factories . 
also memorable is Kay Livingston , the founding president of the Canadian Negro Women ' s Association , who was the key organizer of the First National Convention of Black Women in Toronto . 
the convention is still held today , a lasting tribute to her efforts . 
other Canadian heroines include Elizabeth Bagshaw , Dr. Marion Powell and Dr. Lise Fortier . 
Dr. Bagshaw was the director of the first birth control clinic in Canada . 
she directed the Ontario clinic illegally from 1932 to 1966 . 
Dr. Powell did the same in Toronto . 
Dr. Lise Fortier established the first family planning clinic in Quebec and worked tirelessly to obtain the right to choose for Canadian women . 
there have been many exceptional women in our history , whether in politics , health care or human rights . 
all have shown courage , tenacity , leadership and talent . 
without them , Canada would not be the dynamic , prosperous and exemplary democracy that it is today . 
let us hope that there will be as many heroines in the 21 st century as there were in the last decade . 
and may these words of Nellie McClung inspire our heroines of tomorrow . 
the Senate 
condition of Senator Willie Adams 
hon. Isobel Finnerty : 
honourable senators , I am very happy to report that Senator Willie Adams , who had major surgery yesterday , is recovering extremely well and will , hopefully , be back soon . 
the prognosis looks very good . 
visitors in the Gallery 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I should like to draw your attention to the presence in the gallery of Richard Greene ' s wife , Ethel , and their son , Steven . 
honourable senators , I know that Speakers are not permitted to speak in debate , but on this occasion I should like to say a personal thank you to Richard , a friend with whom I have worked for more than 29 years . 
routine PROCEEDINGS 
security and Intelligence 
government Response to Report of Special Committee Tabled 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , with a pleasure which , I am sure , will be shared by other honourable senators when they read it , the government ' s response to the report of the Special Senate Committee on Security and Intelligence . 
state of Domestic and International Financial System 
report of Banking , Trade and Commerce Committee on Study Presented 
hon. E . Leo Kolber , Chairman of the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 16 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Banking , Trade and Commerce has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , which was authorized by the Senate on Tuesday , November 23 , 1999 , to examine and report upon the present state of the domestic and international financial system and to present its final report no later than December 31 , 2000 , respectfully requests that it be empowered to engage the services of such counsel and technical , clerical and other personnel as may be necessary , and to adjourn from place to place within and outside Canada for the purpose of its examination . 
the budget was considered by the Standing Senate Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration on December 16 , 1999 . In its Second Report , the Committee noted that it is undertaking a review of the budgetary situation pertaining to Senate Committees , and recommended that no more than 6 / 12 of the funds be released until February 10 , 2000 . 
the report was adopted by the Senate on Tuesday , December 14 , 1999 . 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Kolber , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
internal Economy , Budget and Administration 
third Report of Committee Tabled 
with leave of the Senate , I would ask permission to say a few words at this time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I want to welcome Gary O ' Brien to his new position . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Rompkey : 
Gary needs no introduction to any of us . 
he has served us faithfully and well . 
he is a rather deceptive person because behind that rather meek exterior lies much experience and knowledge . 
he personifies that old saying that still waters run deep . 
this is Dr. Gary O ' Brien , a Ph . D . , who has academic merit in his own right , including being an expert on John F . Kennedy . 
he is a teacher . 
he has been engaged in a number of extra - parliamentary activities and he has brought honour to this chamber in that regard . 
above all , Gary has given us outstanding service . 
he is one of those who is intent upon serving . 
i have been impressed with the concern that Gary takes in the service that he provides to us all . 
he wants to ensure that things are done properly and he spares no effort to do that for us . 
i know that he will continue that attitude in his new position . 
welcome to your new position , Gary , and congratulations . 
allow me to recount an apocryphal story . 
i will not attribute the source , but I am told that when Richard first came to the Senate , there was a suit available for the person who would fill the job . 
it was a suit for a height - challenged and rather rotund male . 
Richard fit the suit perfectly . 
he got the job and has been with us ever since . 
therefore , you might say that Richard was well suited to the Senate . 
senator Carstairs said that Richard has been involved with a number of bashes , one in which she , too , was involved . 
i am sure that Richard was involved in more than one bash around this chamber over the years . 
it has happened from time to time that eminent jurists of this land have come here for the ceremony without the proper written authority , and Richard would send them back to get it . 
that is the exercise of power . 
Richard , I want to say congratulations from Gerry and Nicky as well . 
honourable senators , if I may , I wish to congratulate those of the table officers who have moved on to other appointments . 
we welcome them to their new positions . 
we congratulate them and thank them for their work in the past . 
we know they will keep up their high standard of work for us in the future . 
at this time , I would also thank all of the people who work for us in this chamber , both on this floor and elsewhere , and those who keep our record . 
i thank them for the high quality of service that they have provided to us . 
i wish them and all honourable senators a very happy season . 
the Hon. The Speaker : 
honourable senators , is leave granted to allow Senator Nolin to speak ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
hon. Pierre Claude Nolin : 
honourable senators , as the vice - chair of the Committee on Internal Economy , Budgets and Administration , I , too , would like to welcome Gary O ' Brien and wish him every success in his work . 
i know Gary fairly well , as I have worked with him for the past five years on that committee . 
he is a most efficient man , and a very reserved man as well . 
as Senator Rompkey has said , behind his meek exterior there certainly lurks a man of great efficiency and joie de vivre . 
i therefore join with Senator Rompkey to wish Mr. O ' Brien good luck , wishes I also extend to all of his colleagues at the table who have recently assumed their new duties . 
national Defence Act DNA Identification Act Criminal Code 
report of Committee 
hon. Lorna Milne , Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs , presented the following report : 
Thursday , December 16 , 1999 
the Standing Senate Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs has the honour to present its 
third REPORT 
your Committee , to which was referred Bill S - 10 , An Act to amend the National Defence Act , the DNA Identification Act and the Criminal Code , has , in obedience to the Order of Reference of Thursday , November 18 , 1999 , examined the said Bill and now reports the same with the following amendments : 
clause 9 , page 18 : 
( a ) Replace line 26 with the following : 
" 19 . 
( b ) Add after line 38 , the following : 
may take fingerprints from the person for the purpose of the DNA Identification Act . " 
respectfully submitted , 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this report be taken into consideration ? 
on motion of Senator Milne , report placed on the Orders of the Day for consideration at the next sitting of the Senate . 
statistics Act National Archives of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - First Reading 
hon. Lorna Milne presented Bill S - 15 , to amend the Statistics Act and the National Archives of Canada Act ( census records ) . 
bill read first time . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , when shall this bill be read the second time ? 
on motion of Senator Milne , bill placed on Orders of the Day for second reading on Tuesday , February 8 , 2000 . 
report of Canadian Group on 102 nd Inter - Parliamentary Conference Held in Berlin , Germany Tabled 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the report of the Canadian Group of the Inter - Parliamentary Union which represented Canada at the 102 nd Inter - parliamentary Conference held in Berlin , Germany , from October 10 to October 16 . 
report of Canadian Group on 54 th Session of United Nations General Assembly Held in New York Tabled 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table the report of the Canadian Group of the Inter - Parliamentary Union , which represented Canada at the 54 th Session of the United Nations General Assembly , held in New York from October 25 to 27 , 1999 . 
canada - Europe Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Delegation to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly from October 13 to 15 , 1999 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the Canadian delegation of the Canada - Europe Parliamentary Association , OSCE , to the Organization for Security and Co - operation in Europe Parliamentary Assembly , OSC PA , second parliamentary conference : " Subregional Economic Cooperation Processes in Europe Faced with the New Challenges " held in Nantes , France , from October 13 to 15 , 1999 , entitled " The Nantes Document . " 
canada - France Inter - Parliamentary Association 
report of Canadian Group on 29 th Annual Meeting from September 8 to 15 , 1999 Tabled 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I have the honour to table , in both official languages , the report of the 29 th annual meeting of the Canadian group of the Canada - France Inter - Parliamentary Association , held from September 8 to September 15 , 1999 in Montreal , Laval , Ottawa , Vancouver and Victoria . 
inter - Parliamentary Union 
report of Canadian Group on 102 nd Inter - Parliamentary Conference Held in Berlin , Germany - Notice of Inquiry 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , I give notice that on the second day of the next sitting , February 8 , 2000 , I will call the attention of the Senate to the report of the Canadian Group of the Inter - Parliamentary Union on the 102 nd Inter - Parliamentary Conference , held in Berlin from October 9 to 16 , 1999 . 
question PERIOD 
agriculture and Agri - Food 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Response to Report of House of Commons Committee 
hon. Leonard J . Gustafson : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i was most disappointed to read this morning in the National Post that the farming crisis will not get the Prime Minister ' s attention until after the holidays . 
i have been asking questions on this topic for a year and a half . 
the premiers of the provinces and , even now , Dennis Mills - and I give him credit for it - are indicating that they will bring this to the attention of those living in the City of Toronto by holding a benefit day . 
the House of Commons Committee on Agriculture was out on the Prairies , and I attended two of the approximately eight meetings that they held . 
they did an excellent job . 
the House of Commons committee admitted that there are serious farm crisis problems and that the AIDA program is not working . 
has that committee yet made a presentation to the Prime Minister and to the cabinet ? 
i understand the House of Commons may not resume until February 7 . This matter cannot wait . 
has the committee made recommendations to the Prime Minister and to the cabinet as a result of their findings in the Prairies ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I agree with the honourable senator that the committee of the House of Commons did some good work in the Prairies . 
they returned with some very strong views that have been communicated to the Prime Minister , to the Minister of Agriculture , and to cabinet colleagues . 
the Prime Minister has had an opportunity to speak to his colleagues with respect to the committee ' s trip to the Prairies , andis very much seized with this problem . 
even though there may not be , as the article indicated , a formal first ministers meeting before Christmas , one cannot assume that the Prime Minister will , in any way , put the problem out of mind . 
senator Gustafson : 
honourable senators , one wonders how urgent this situation would have to get before the Prime Minister would give it his attention . 
did the Prime Minister meet with the committee ? 
i was parliamentary secretary to Prime Minister Mulroney , and it did not take that much to get people who had a serious problem a meeting with the Prime Minister . 
that committee did a wonderful job , and I was there to see it . 
it admitted that the AIDA program did not work , that there had to be redirection in this whole area of agriculture , and that the situation constituted a most serious national problem . 
i cannot understand why that committee cannot get a meeting with the Prime Minister . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
what golf course is he on ? 
that is what we have to find out . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am not aware of what meetings may have taken place between the Prime Minister members of that committee . 
i am sure that the members of the committee have indicated their views , both privately and in groups , to the Prime Minister , to the Minister of Agriculture , and to others . 
as to what arrangements will be made with respect to a formal meeting , I am not aware at the moment . 
i am sure the Prime Minister is aware of their views and will remain seized of the problem over the next number of weeks and months , even though there may not be a formal meeting of first ministers . 
plight of Western Grain Farmers 
hon. David Tkachuk : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question on this issue . 
i think if David Milgaard ' s mother was trying to meet this Prime Minister rather than the former one , David Milgaard would still be rotting in jail . 
some Hon. Senators : 
senator Tkachuk : 
well , it is time to get a little rough around here ! 
senator Graham : 
be sensible . 
ask a question . 
senator Tkachuk : 
i am being sensible . 
we on this side of the floor have been very patient . 
we have asked these questions for a year and a half now . 
it is not as though we raised this issue just yesterday . 
i have asked these questions . 
even senators on the opposite side of the house , such as Senator Sparrow , have asked them . 
we have returned this issue over and over , and the only response we ever get is , " We will see . 
we may have a bad program . " 
everyone in the country knows it is bad . 
will the Prime Minister be taking a holiday as well from the financial loans and grants to his own riding over the Christmas holidays , or will the financial tap remain on there , while it is turned off on the Prairies ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the Prime Minister will remain seized of all of the problems of the country , as there is very little escape for him , regardless of the time of year . 
nothing I say is meant to diminish the serious nature of the situation in the farming communities , particularly on the Prairies . 
however , I would remind honourable senators that this government has committed significant funding . 
admittedly , the program , as we have said in debate here in this place , is not working the way everyone would like . 
there was a commitment to review the program and to ensure that the money would get to the farmers more quickly . 
in addition , since I arrived , another $ 170 million has been committed to the program . 
premier Romanow , who is so concerned about additional assistance , chose not to match that and make a similar commitment , even though the agreement for additional funding requires a commitment by the province . 
i am not sure , but I believe Premier Romanow may have introduced a budget just in the last few days . 
in any event , there does not seem to be any significant commitment of new moneys from the provincial government . 
their solution is simply to ask for more money from the federal government . 
Mr. Romanow has spoken for a number of years now about his surpluses - one surplus after another . 
he is very proud of that , and he should be . 
however , if he wants to raise a concern on this matter , he should be prepared to come to the table as well . 
plight of Western Grain Farmers - Request for Response by Prime Minister 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i would say Premier Romanow has been prudent in not putting more money into a bad program . 
the government leader ' s answer , therefore , does not get the government off the hook . 
what we need in Saskatchewan is a clear statement from the Prime Minister , first , that he cares about this issue . 
it will go a long way to tell the people of Saskatchewan that Canada has Saskatchewan ' s interests in mind . 
second , we need a clear statement that something will be done . 
so far , we have heard such sentiment from the ministers and from members of Parliament , but the Prime Minister has certainly not made it one of his top issues . 
if the government leader is correct about what the Prime Minister will do later , then the best thing he could do this Christmas season would be to give us a sign . 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would disagree slightly with the honourable senator ' s generous approach to the Premier of Saskatchewan . I am not an expert on the program , but I am informed that the provinces were involved in creating these criteria . 
there was a process and it is a joint program . 
admittedly , the program is not functioning properly . 
we have had discussions of that nature here and in other places . 
the program is not functioning as effectively as it should , and the Minister of Agriculture has said that the deficiencies in the program should be reviewed and addressed . 
senator Tkachuk : 
a coalition government ! 
senator Boudreau : 
i do not have the statistics now , but I remember reading that the cuts in assistance to agriculture by the Government of Saskatchewan have been substantial . 
they were something in the order of 60 per cent to 70 per cent , over 10 years . 
i think he has an obligation at least to say , " I am prepared to commit funding . " 
the federal government committed $ 170 million to the program . 
if it had been a matching program , they could have said , " We will not commit this $ 170 million , unless Premier Romanow matches it . " 
that would have been consistent with the joint program . 
they did not say that . 
premier Romanow did not match it ; nor did he offer other funding of which I am aware . 
senator Andreychuk : 
as my mother would say , two wrongs do not make a right . 
if Premier Romanow is not doing the right thing , or has not done the right thing , that is no excuse for the Prime Minister . 
the Prime Minister has a responsibility for the entire country . 
we need a signal from the Prime Minister , and from no one else , that Saskatchewan issues are important and necessary and that he is dealing with them . 
that much now would go a long way to easing the plight of people in Saskatchewan whose future is uncertain . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I appreciate the concern raised by Senator Andreychuk . 
i am confident that this problem for Prairie farmers is a matter of concern to the Prime Minister . 
as I have in the past , I will certainly make both he and the Minister of Agriculture aware of the discussions that have taken place here . 
intergovernmental Affairs 
Ontario - Regional Restructuring Legislation - Legal Process Required to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier : 
honourable senators , yesterday , the Ottawa municipal council debated and adopted a motion asking the Province of Ontario to designate as officially bilingual the City of Ottawa that will be created next year . 
according to an article published in Le Droit , today , the new city will not have the right to declare itself bilingual . 
in a 1986 decision , the Ontario Superior Court ruled that the City of Kapuskasing had neither the right nor the authority to declare itself officially bilingual . 
this is yet another problem ! 
on the one hand , there is no provision in this regard in Bill 25 authorizing the restructuring of the new City of Ottawa . 
i recommend that the enabling statute establish and designate the City of Ottawa as officially bilingual , in French and in English . 
it would appear that the province ' s response that the new council to be elected in November 2000 will have the power to determine the linguistic status of the new City of Ottawa . 
can the minister tell us if the Premier of Ontario is playing games regarding this issue , knowing full well that the new City of Ottawa cannot declare itself officially bilingual , with equal rights for English and French ? 
can the minister assure this house that he will try to get clarification from legal advisors regarding this issue , so as to put an end to the uncertainty and confusion generated by Mr. Harris ' decision ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , the issue raised by the Honourable Senator Gauthier was drawn to my attention earlier in the day . 
i was able to seek some advice with respect to it . 
the new municipality , as with all municipalities in the province and , indeed , in the country , is legally a creature of the provincial government and falls under provincial law . 
it exercises that authority within constitutional jurisdiction . 
that authority is given to it in the form of provincial legislation . 
to the best of my knowledge and information , the new municipality of Ottawa , indeed , any municipality in the Province of Ontario , would not have the jurisdiction or authority under legislation governing municipalities to declare itself bilingual . 
there is legislation in Ontario dealing with the provision of French - language services which allows a municipality to deliver certain services through bylaw . 
in fact , it may decide that services may be delivered in two languages in one case or another . 
however , that does not translate into an ability to declare itself officially a bilingual city . 
i am told that that jurisdiction remains with the Province of Ontario . 
the old City of Ottawa , if I can call it that , acted under this legislation and through bylaws to provide bilingual services . 
i am told those bilingual services will remain in place until a new bylaw might change that . 
to determine the new City of Ottawa to be officially bilingual is an authority resting solely with the Province of Ontario . 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government on the same issue . 
when I had the opportunity to address the chamber earlier this week , our colleague Senator Grafstein raised the possibility that the federal government could use either its jurisdiction over the National Capital Region or the disallowance power . 
i was of the opinion that the second suggestion was not one that would be welcome as a first choice . 
yesterday , the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs said : 
we will consider what constitutional means we have in our own jurisdiction to help the situation under the circumstances . 
today , The Toronto Star reported that some constitutional experts think that the federal government might have in mind a 1960 s Supreme Court of Canada decision giving the federal government powers to legislate on issues affecting the national capital . 
will the Leader of the Government in the Senate consult with the Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada to see whether , under that decision of the Supreme Court of Canada , the federal government has the capacity to intervene under its general power to legislate on issues affecting national issues , including the national capital , to declare the new City of Ottawa bilingual ? 
senator Boudreau : 
i am sure that all honourable senators would prefer as a resolution to this situation a clear movement by the Province of Ontario to declare the capital city officially bilingual . 
the government has indicated that it is reviewing possible options . 
no decision has been made at this point with respect to those options . 
one still hopes that Premier Harris and his government will move in an appropriate way . 
failing that , I am sure I can pass on the request of the Honourable Senator Joyal and have the appropriate minister review that possibility as well , if , in fact , it is not already under review . 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , the senator asked the very question I had in mind . 
bilingual city status means a bit more than bilingual services in Ottawa . 
Ottawa , our nation ' s capital , must send a clear message throughout the country by being declared bilingual . 
i wish to emphasize that bilingual city status means more than obtaining services in French . 
senator Boudreau : 
i thank the honourable senator for that comment . 
in that respect , the municipality has no authority . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
honourable senators , I have a supplementary question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
i asked Senator Joyal about the disallowance power . 
he did advise , and I have since discovered , that the disallowance power was utilized regularly until about four decades ago . 
i understand that it has fallen into disrepute . 
there are some constitutional views on the matter , but it is still in the Constitution . 
would the Leader of the Government in the Senate also seek advice from the Attorney General of Canada as to whether , in extremis , which many of us consider this situation to be , the disallowance power would be adopted for legislation we feel is inconsistent with the 21 st century and Canada ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I am sure that the Attorney General is now reviewing all of the options possible in terms of response . 
none are the preferred option . 
the preferred option is to have the government and the Premier of Ontario act . 
i will ensure that this option is before the Attorney General as well . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , in the course of six years in the Senate and 30 years in the House of Commons , I think that I have made my position on what Canada really is sufficiently clear . 
a country has one capital . 
some call it the national capital , but I call it the federal capital because it is a federal institution . 
the national capital must reflect the country ' s history and diversity ; in it , Senator Hays from Alberta , Senator Prud ' homme and all the other senators must feel at ease . 
i take a different approach . 
i am going to speak to a group in the Legislature of Ontario on Friday , January 14 , in the very heart of the provincial Parliament . 
all honourable senators should join together , some going the judicial route and others using persuasion . 
in the end , we should make Canadians understand that we are not asking that any city be bilingual . 
that is another debate . 
we should make it clear - and I should like the minister to comment briefly - that there is a difference between the debate concerning " la capitale f é d é rale " and all of the other issues . 
that is a completely different debate . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , I would say to the honourable senator , as I have said on at least one previous occasion , that his very eloquent words on the subject are words with which I associate myself . 
given the comments on this topic in this place , a number of things are clear . 
first , honourable senators regard this as an extremely serious , fundamental issue for our country . 
second , it is not a partisan issue . 
senators from both sides of the floor have spoken to the issue , and I think we have demonstrated clearly that it is not a partisan issue . 
third , this issue is peculiar to this city as the national capital , or the federal capital as the senator puts it . 
i have expressed and will continue to express my views on this subject . 
the views of honourable senators are well known and must be regarded seriously . 
i am confident that the government shares those views . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
if the Attorney General of Canada does a study of the bilingual status of Canada ' s capital , could we not also study section 16 of the Constitution , which has to do specifically with Canada ' s capital and the residual power of the Parliament of Canada , in section 91 , under which certain powers are given and recognized in law for Canada ' s national capital region ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , the Attorney General is acting in her role as chief lawyer to the Government of Canada . 
as any good lawyer would do , she reviews the options and presents a range of them to the government in the hopes that none are necessary and that the issue will be resolved in other ways . 
i will undertake to provide the substance of the honourable senator ' s remarks to the Attorney General . 
i am confident that she will review all of the options available , as any conscientious lawyer would do on behalf of a client . 
hon. Sheila Finestone : 
honourable senators , my question is for the Leader of the Government in the Senate . 
in reviewing the situation at hand and in looking at the obligation of the government to designate Ottawa as officially bilingual , would that designation include the full concept of equality under official status , including the equality of rights and privileges , not just language ? 
the question revolves around the expression itself . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , obviously the ramifications of full bilingual status will be elucidated in the judicial forum . 
i give that undertaking not only to the Honourable Senator Finestone but to the other honourable senators who addressed this topic as well . 
transport 
Halifax International Airport Authority Agreement - Obligation by Federal Government to Control Acidity of Slate 
hon. J . Michael Forrestall : 
honourable senators , my question for the Leader of the Government in the Senate arises from concerns being expressed with respect to the arrangement between the Government of Canada and the pro tem Halifax International Airport Authority that will take over full control of the airport in a formal way sometime in February . 
the concern arises over a problem that I thought had been resolved early on in the negotiations . 
my question deals with the actions that must be taken on a regular basis to control the acidic nature of the slate on and around the airport . 
as the minister is well aware , the airport is high on a hill and drains into a number of watershed areas , and there are potential dangers associated with that situation . 
has the minister had any communication with officials of the new airport authority on this issue on which they believe the federal transport authority has reneged ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I am aware of the situation of which the honourable senator speaks . 
these negotiations are conducted like all negotiations . 
there is give and take and much argument on both sides . 
positions are advanced and compromises are made . 
i spoke to officials of the airport authority shortly after they agreed to and signed the arrangement . 
i do not think any changes have been made in the agreement since they executed it . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , is it then the case that the $ 700,000 that was agreed upon to effect remedial action remains in place , that there is not , as has been alleged , an ongoing responsibility for damages that might occur in the future , and that this matter has been resolved ? 
is it correct that these arrangements are in place and , if anything is to happen it would happen between now and the middle of February when the takeover is to become effective ? 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , to the best of my knowledge , the agreement covered matters such as ongoing environmental liability and responsibility for costs of operations , including operating costs connected with the environment . 
the key point is that the agreement that the authority and the Department of Transport signed covered those matters and , to the best of my knowledge , it has not in any way changed since the authority signed it . 
as in any negotiation , I am sure that the agreement does not reflect everything that the authority wanted and reflects somewhat more than the Department of Transport wanted to give . 
however , as far as I am aware , both parties signed a final agreement which addresses the issues the honourable senator raises . 
i do not know if it addresses them in the way that everyone would like , but it does address them . 
it was signed by both parties . 
senator Forrestall : 
honourable senators , the minister is then not able to give assurance that the $ 700,000 a year will be forthcoming to effect the remedial action necessary . 
i am sure that is where it now stands . 
senator Boudreau : 
honourable senators , it has been three weeks or more since I had that brief meeting . 
to the best of my recollection , the sum of $ 700,000 to address that problem is included in the agreement . 
i will check that to make sure , but I do recall very specifically that , when I met with the group , the agreement had been signed . 
it dealt with all the issues , and I do not believe anyone has changed the agreement since . 
aboriginal Peoples 
request for Response to Committee Report on Aboriginal Veterans 
hon. A . Raynell Andreychuk : 
honourable senators , I commend the government for its timely response to the report of the Special Senate Committee on Security and Intelligence . 
we work long and hard on our reports in this place , and the government often looks to them for assistance in making public policy . 
however , when can we expect to receive the response which we requested from the government on the report of the Committee on Aboriginal Peoples on aboriginal veterans ? 
senator Fairbairn was the Leader of the Government in the Senate at the time that report was presented . 
she assured us that the government was working on it and we would be receiving a response . 
many aboriginal veterans have died since that report was presented . 
the government ' s response is extremely important to those who survive . 
it is extremely important that we not ignore people who put their lives on the line for our safety and security . 
when will we receive a response from the government ? 
hon. J . Bernard Boudreau ( Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , this is the first time this issue has been brought to my attention . 
i will contact the minister responsible and attempt to get an answer to the honourable senator ' s question . 
i will probably obtain that answer over the recess and I should be able to respond when we resume . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I regret that the time for Question Period has expired . 
orders OF THE DAY 
appropriation Bill No. 3 , 1999 - 2000 
third Reading 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it was well that the appropriate time elapsed between the report stage and third reading stage of Bill C - 21 for it afforded us the opportunity to take one last look at this bill . 
i would draw to the attention of honourable senators that the tile of the bill is " An Act for the granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 2000 " . 
on page 3 of the bill , clause 6 provides : 
( 1 ) An appropriation that is granted by this or any other Act and referred to in Schedule 2 may be charged after the end of the fiscal year that is after the fiscal year for which the appropriation is granted ... 
in other words , clause 6 of this bill attempts to provide authority for the expenditure of funds after March 31 , 2000 . 
in Beauchesne ' s Parliamentary Rules & Forms , 6 th Edition , at page 258 , we find described the business of supply and ways and means . 
under " Purpose " , paragraph 933 , we see : 
the purpose of the Estimates is to present to Parliament the budgetary and non - budgetary expenditure proposals of the Government for the next fiscal year . 
honourable senators , clause 6 presents a problem with this bill . 
is there an easy explanation for it which a member of our National Finance Committee , which examined the bill in detail , could share with us ? 
hon. Anne C . Cools : 
honourable senators , I thank the Honourable Senator Kinsella for his question . 
if I understood him correctly , his question deals with the fact that an appropriation seems to be straddling two years . 
had he signalled this during the committee hearings , we could have studied the matter in more detail . 
i believe that a similar situation occurred with our last supply bill and that Senator Bolduc raised the issue at that time . 
i believe the department ' s response was to the effect that the vote had been managed in one year , but that the completion of the expenditure would take place partially over and into another year . 
if we are talking about the same thing - and I believe they informed us at the time that this was not unusual - this practice was becoming a little more common because of the complexity and the size of these appropriations . 
i hope that I have answered the honourable senator ' s question , but I am prepared to look into the matter in more detail . 
as I said , I missed part of the honourable senator ' s question . 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , this is the issue and this is the principle . 
if you look at page 30 of the bill , Schedule 2 is : 
based on the Supplementary Estimates ( A ) 1999 - 2000 , the amount hereby granted is $ 234,733,521 , being the total of the amounts of the items in those Estimates as contained in this Schedule . 
in addition , Schedule 2 refers to : 
sums granted to Her Majesty by this Act for the financial year ending March 31 , 2000 , that may be charged to that fiscal year and the following fiscal year ending March 31 and the purposes of which they are granted . 
this applies mainly to the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency , but that situation raises the question as to whether or not a good practice is being contemplated . 
i do not wish to go the route of raising a point of order on this matter , but the National Finance Committee may wish to look into the matter of voting a supply that is to be expended on or before March 31 , 2000 . 
senator Cools : 
i would be prepared to commit to Senator Kinsella that our committee - and I can consult with the chairman , Senator Murray - look at this particular question and study it in greater detail . 
if it a recurring phenomenon , we should get our heads around it and find out why it is happening . 
i take the criticism and the honourable senator ' s consideration with great seriousness , and I commit myself to follow through on the matter . 
honourable senators , in speaking to the second reading of Bill C - 21 yesterday , I gave substantial detail about the contents of the bill . 
senator Murray , as chairman of the National Finance Committee , joined in the debate and gave the chamber his thoughtful and detailed remarks . 
i should like to say as well , with a bit of levity , a bit of seriousness , and with great appreciation and gratitude , that yesterday I had believed that consensus was high on this bill , that the Senate had given the matter serious study and that the Senate ' s consideration was properly satisfied . 
therefore , as deputy chair of the committee , and representing the government ' s interests in the matter , I rose to my feet yesterday and I asked leave to bring forward by one day the third reading of this bill . 
honourable senators , this bill deserves proper consideration . 
i thank the Honourable Senator Lynch - Staunton again because he was doing his duty as Leader of the Opposition and performing his role in a manner we all respect . 
in addition he was performing his duty as a senator . 
that duty is especially important because our Constitution awards to the Senate a constitutional role in these supply bills , and this bill gives the authority to spend a kingly sum of money or , shall I say , a princely sum of money . 
i thank honourable senators again and wish you all a Merry Christmas . 
i am grateful that we all will be paid . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
income Tax Conventions Implementation Bill , 1999 
third Reading 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Hervieux - Payette , P . C . , seconded by the Honourable Senator Gauthier , for the third reading of Bill S - 3 , to implement an agreement , conventions and protocols between Canada and Kyrgyzstan , Lebanon , Algeria , Bulgaria , Portugal , Uzbekistan , Jordan , Japan and Luxembourg for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income . 
hon. John Lynch - Staunton ( Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Cools for that royal consent , which I appreciate very much . 
senator Andreychuk , yesterday , gave an excellent presentation on the concerns that have arisen on Bill S - 3 . 
her comments are sufficient enough that mine will be very brief . 
at the risk of repeating some of her comments , it is only to emphasize what the debate was all about . 
honourable senators , it is highly unusual that a tax treaty bill would have taken so much time . 
i believe it is because we are now tending to go from the pure financial trade aspect of treaties to their human rights aspect . 
hopefully , that is something which will be emphasized over the years . 
the government only has itself to blame for our taking a special interest in this bill because its briefing book was just outstanding . 
the briefing book in support of the bill was one of the best , if not the best , I have yet to see . 
i wish to congratulate the authors of the book for having given such support to those who took an interest in the bill . 
honourable senators , we had a bit of sport with the Deputy Leader of the Government in our insistence that the bill go to the Foreign Affairs Committee and his insistence , quite rightly at the time , that it should go to the Banking Committee because that has always been the custom . 
therefore , the deputy leader generously allowed the bill to go to the two committees . 
that was somewhat amusing and confusing at the time , but , in retrospect , I believe it was a good exercise . 
the Banking Committee looked at the tax treaties themselves , and the Foreign Affairs Committee concentrated more on the countries affected - one in particular - and how Canada , in its foreign policy , considered human rights in its determination of relations with certain countries . 
i feel that these bills should go more to the Foreign Affairs Committee than to the Banking Committee because more and more the discussion on tax treaties will be on the countries themselves rather than on the nature of the treaties . 
the treaties are all fairly similar . 
they are meant to avoid double taxation and tax avoidance . 
that is really what we were trying to determine in singling out Uzbekistan as one country with a record that is pretty shabby . 
i will not repeat what I said on second reading , but it is not a country that I would like to trade with , even less to visit , under the present circumstances . 
the answer that we were given is not a very satisfactory one - at least to me . 
one of the witnesses before the Foreign Affairs Committee was the Director , Human Rights , Humanitarian Affairs and International Women ' s Equality , Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade . 
her answer was as follows : 
from a Canadian perspective , Canada is not a large enough partner on its own to coerce change in a country ' s human rights practices through unilateral sanctions . 
even when sanctions are multilateral and well enforced , they are not always particularly effective . 
she also said that , to date , Canada has only adopted sanctions endorsed by the United Nations . 
there is a lot of realism in that comment , but there is also , I think , an abandonment of principle . 
whether a country is small and its influence marginal - which is not the case for Canada - if it has certain principles , it should not be afraid to forward them and to act upon them . 
that is what we were trying to get in front of the committee and in front of the Foreign Affairs officials . 
senator Taylor yesterday asked whether we should confuse human rights with trade . 
this a philosophical argument that we need not get into today . 
some people feel that engagement is the key . 
i feel that isolation and boycotting might have more impact . 
again , though , that is highly theoretical and hypothetical at this stage . 
we just want to stress , as Senator Andreychuk did yesterday , that , when we engage in similar treaties , a more than passing interest should be taken in the human rights record of that country with which we intend to have an agreement . 
as Senator Grafstein pointed out at the Foreign Affairs Committee meeting , in the United States , every year , the state department prepares a thorough analysis of the human rights record of just about every country in the world . 
that analysis is submitted to the administration and to the Congress , for them to do with whatever they wish . 
we do not appear to give as much importance to that kind of work in this country . 
it is not a question of duplicating what is done elsewhere , but a question of using what is available to enforce the principles that we have tried to adopt regarding human rights , and to implement them . 
as some honourable senators know , I did have amendments which I would have presented to remove the Uzbekistan treaty from the bill , but I think the point has been well made . 
i agree , after hearing Senator Andreychuk and others , that it would be unfair to single out a particular country at this stage and penalize it without really having more information on that country . 
however , now that our point has been made I hope it will be acted on so that , whenever the time comes for other tax treaties , the officials responsible will go beyond the traditional drafting process and take into consideration the human rights record of that country to determine whether we should or should not carry on with an agreement . 
human rights should not be an exclusive consideration , but it should be given more than the passing consideration it is given now . 
hon. Jerahmiel S . Grafstein : 
will the honourable senator accept a brief question ? 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
certainly . 
senator Grafstein : 
i agree in principle with everything the honourable senator said about the disconnection between government policy and human rights violations , and how one can link those in a useful way to bring some moral suasion on an offending state . 
has the honourable senator given any consideration , for instance , to passing a resolution of this chamber telling the Canadian delegation to the OSCE that the Senate of Canada is unhappy with the human rights record of a particular country , in this instance Uzbekistan , and instructing the delegation to take the concerns to the OSCE for debate there ? 
in that small way , possibly his concerns , which I share , could be brought to an international forum where there might be some moral suasion , and the opportunity to bring onside other states that share those particular views . 
senator Lynch - Staunton : 
honourable senators , I thank Senator Grafstein for that excellent suggestion . 
it had not occurred to me , but I will be happy to follow through on it . 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , at this third reading stage , I would like to make a comment , if I may , on what the Leader of the Opposition and my colleague Senator Andreychuk have said . 
we do not disagree on the issue of the principle of human rights ; the lack of agreement is , instead , on the means for advancing human rights . 
in my speech on third reading I referred to the actions undertaken by CIDA to facilitate learning about respecting human rights , application of the rule of law , and the encouragement of progress in Uzbekistan . 
under these circumstances , Bill S - 3 is in the general interest of Canada and of the populations that will benefit from trade . 
it will improve the condition of the people of these countries and at the same time will facilitate the advancement of human rights . 
when the fundamental rights and the survival of individuals are protected , it is far easier to ensure that those rights are respected . 
i therefore move passage of Bill S - 3 . 
motion agreed to and bill read third time and passed . 
Nisga ' a Final Agreement Bill 
second Reading - Debate Adjourned 
as one of the senators in the chamber who represents a region of Canada famously known as British Columbia , it gives me great pride and pleasure to sponsor the introduction and recommend the passage of Bill C - 9 . 
in this I am supported especially by my fellow senators from British Columbia , Senators Perrault and Fitzpatrick on this side of the chamber ; but I hope also in good time by British Columbia senators on the opposite side of this chamber . 
of course , I seek the support and endorsement of all honourable senators from every region of Canada . 
we believe that Bill C - 9 offers what is possible and will increase the momentum to negotiate , which is critical to the social stability and economic progress that all British Columbians seek . 
the bill before us is an historic achievement . 
it represents the best about Canada and Canadians , namely , our willingness to listen , to seek consensus , to accept diversity , to find solutions and to develop compromises . 
this bill , which would give effect to the Nisga ' a Final Agreement , marks another milestone in the negotiation of modern treaties in this country . 
beginning with the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement of the mid - 1970 s , and the more recent Inuvialuit , Nunavut and Yukon agreements , this chamber has had the privilege to review legislation that brings Canadians together , that recognizes the place of aboriginal people within the fabric of Canada ' s economy and society , and develops a new and more positive relationship between governments and aboriginal peoples . 
honourable senators , the Nisga ' a Final Agreement and this implementing legislation can be included under that umbrella and history of modern treaty settlements . 
our role is to consider whether this legislation accurately reflects the final agreement , as negotiated by the three negotiating parties , and whether the bill deserves to be passed into law . 
i firmly believe that this bill and the accompanying treaty serves the best interests of Canadians , operates within Canada ' s Constitution and legal framework , and that it should be passed into law . 
before moving to some of the substantive issues , I should like to give honourable senators a description of who the Nisga ' a people are , where they live and how their land claims agreement and the bill giving it effect arrived here for the consideration of this chamber . 
the Nisga ' a live along the Nass River in a relatively remote area of northwestern British Columbia , 100 kilometres north of Terrace and Prince Rupert . 
other than the 2,500 Nisga ' a who live in four villages along the river and its mouth , only approximately 125 other permanent residents occupy the 24,000 square kilometres of this valley . 
the only organized communities in the Nass Valley are Nisga ' a communities . 
the Nisga ' a who live in the Nass Valley are one cultural group among the northwest coast aboriginal peoples . 
they have a complex culture which is based on the rich resources of the sea . 
historically , like other northwest coast people , the Nisga ' a were great artists , builders and crafts people . 
their art still graces the exteriors and interiors of many of the buildings in their villages . 
salmon and the other resources of the Nass provided both food and the raw materials for Nisga ' a architectural , artistic and social achievement . 
here on the banks of the Ottawa River , Nisga ' a artistic and cultural achievements are on view in the Grand Hall of the Museum of Civilization and in the recently mounted " Common Bowl " exhibit . 
they can also be found in many of the world ' s museums . 
today , about 2,500 of the 5,500 Nisga ' a live in four villages : 
Kincolith , Greenville , Canyon City and New Aiyansh . 
most other Nisga ' a live in Terrace , Prince Rupert or Vancouver . 
high value is placed on schooling and post - secondary education . 
the Nisga ' a operate their own provincial school district , School District No. 92 . 
it offers kindergarten to grade 12 to both Nisga ' a and other residents of the Nass Valley . 
one seat on the elected school board is reserved for a non - Nisga ' a resident . 
they also operate their own health board and , again , provide for non - Nisga ' a representation . 
they have taken up every available opportunity to take over education , health care , social and family services and other government programs , seeking wherever they could to strengthen their families and community . 
they have also worked cooperatively with their neighbours . 
they participate in regional district government where Nisga ' a elder Harry Nyce sits on the board . 
the Nisga ' a have pursued a settlement of what they describe as the land question since at least 1887 when , as honourable senators have heard , Nisga ' a chiefs first travelled to the legislature in British Columbia to seek recognition of aboriginal title , a treaty settlement and a measure of self - government . 
their trip to Victoria was unsuccessful . 
in 1890 , they established their first land committee . 
in 1913 , that committee sent a petition to the Privy Council in England seeking to resolve the land question . 
again , they were unsuccessful . 
from the 1920 s to the 1950 s , the Nisga ' a and other nations ' efforts to have their rights recognized and practise their culture were repressed . 
legislation outlawed traditional practices such as the potlatch , and made it illegal to raise money to advance land and other legal claims . 
following repeal of this legislation in 1955 , the Nisga ' a re - established their land committee . 
under the leadership of Mr. Frank Calder , the tribal council took the land question to the courts . 
this was a bold decision and a mark of the Nisga ' a ' s commitment to seeking a resolution of their rights . 
many other First Nations were concerned that this court case might be unsuccessful and , therefore , would destroy any hope that their rights would be recognized in the political process . 
in the face of unfavourable lower court decisions , the Nisga ' a pursued their case to the Supreme Court of Canada . 
in 1973 , the Supreme Court issued the Calder decision . 
although the court split evenly on whether the Nisga ' a continued to hold aboriginal title , it recognized the possibility of aboriginal rights and title continuing to exist in Canada . 
this decision was a major factor in prompting the Trudeau government to adopt a policy of negotiating land claims where they had not already been settled in Canada . 
it is in our hands , after careful deliberation , to do our part to bring that reconciliation about . 
we also have an opportunity to put this chamber squarely behind the principle that the treaty negotiation process in British Columbia is valid and necessary . 
only through negotiation , compromise and vision can treaty settlements be reached that meet everyone ' s interests . 
only with the full consent of the stakeholders can we progress . 
the Nisga ' a were one of the earliest groups to take up negotiations as a part of this new process . 
negotiations commenced in 1976 . 
however , without the participation of the Province of British Columbia , progress on issues related to land could not be made . 
five years after signing the 1990 framework agreement on how to proceed with negotiations , the Chr é tien government , the Harcourt government and the Nisga ' a signed an agreement in principle which set out the main elements of the agreement which is before us today . 
that agreement in principle received considerable public debate and legislative scrutiny in British Columbia . 
the principles agreed to in that document formed the content and structure of the final agreement negotiations . 
two and a half years later , in August 1998 , the Chr é tien government and the Glen Clark government initialled a final agreement . 
this was a great achievement and the culmination of over 100 years of perseverance by the Nisga ' a . 
not only did this process include the participation of four national governments - those of Trudeau , Clark , Mulroney and Chr é tien - but also three different provincial governments . 
in addition , more than 500 public consultations and information meetings were held in British Columbia . 
the Nisga ' a treaty marks a milestone in Canada ' s long history of treaty making with First Nations in this country . 
this is Canada ' s first treaty to include self - government , a self - government which addresses the rights of the Nisga ' a people within the Canadian legal framework and one which was negotiated with the rights of all Canadians in mind . 
in this context , I would refer to a statement made in the House of Commons in second reading debate there on October 26 , 1999 , by the Honourable Robert D . Nault , Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development . 
he said : 
the government believes that self - government is like other aboriginal rights recognized and affirmed by Section 35 of the Constitution of 1982 . 
as the courts have suggested , these rights are best negotiated , not litigated and that is precisely what we have done . 
i now want to outline how the Nisga ' a government will operate , because I think the agreement demonstrates how effective and accountable aboriginal government can be negotiated and how practical and workable arrangements can be established . 
the Nisga ' a Final Agreement Act and the Nisga ' a Final Agreement are , in part , intended to modernize Nisga ' a government and to create a local government structure for the Nisga ' a people which is democratic , accountable and effective . 
no longer will the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development retain the ultimate authority to approve decisions that are properly local in nature . 
significant limitations to Nisga ' a self - governance under the Indian Act will no longer apply and the Nisga ' a will be able to provide government which will be inclusive of their communities and all members of the Nisga ' a nation . 
i know our colleague opposite from Saskatchewan , Senator Tkachuk , in his Bill S - 14 , gave considerable thought to the subject of aboriginal governance . 
i think he and others will find that many of the powers available to the Nisga ' a government are similar to those listed in the schedule to the former Bill S - 14 . 
the Nisga ' a government will be a democratic government within the established Canadian model . 
first , all adult Nisga ' a men and women will be able to run for office and vote for their government representatives . 
for example , it must provide conflict - of - interest guidelines and mechanisms to ensure financial accountability in a manner similar to other governments in Canada . 
that is accountability both to its own members and to the governments from which it will derive some of its funding . 
the Nisga ' a Constitution is central to the exercise of a democratic Nisga ' a government . 
it will operate within and be subject to the Constitution of Canada . 
the treaty sets out specific requirements of the Nisga ' a Constitution which must be met . 
these cannot be overturned by any future Nisga ' a government . 
the treaty also has provisions to protect the rights of other aboriginal persons and the rights of non - Nisga ' a individuals who reside on Nisga ' a lands . 
the Nisga ' a Constitution must provide for the recognition and protection of the rights and freedoms of Nisga ' a citizens and must provide the ability to challenge the validity of Nisga ' a laws . 
it must also contain key features , such as mechanisms to provide rights to appeal administrative decisions and rights of access to information . 
although the Nisga ' a government will contain elements unique to the Nisga ' a culture and heritage , it will be quite recognizable as a government similar to other governments in Canada . 
it can and will be held politically and legally accountable for the decisions it makes . 
Lisims government will also be primarily responsible for relations with other levels of government . 
the four Nisga ' a village governments will make up the second tier of Nisga ' a government . 
the Nisga ' a treaty also takes into account Nisga ' a people living off Nisga ' a lands . 
the treaty establishes three urban locals in Terrace , Prince Rupert and Greater Vancouver . 
these locals do not have law - making authority but will participate in Nisga ' a government by each electing a member to the Nisga ' a Lisims government . 
let me now turn to the Nisga ' a law - making authority . 
the only law - making powers the Nisga ' a will have are those set out in the treaty . 
i must remind honourable senators that there are no exclusive Nisga ' a law - making authorities . 
federal and provincial laws will apply to Nisga ' a lands concurrently with Nisga ' a laws . 
this will be just like other jurisdictions in Canada where Canadians are subject to federal , provincial and municipal or regional laws simultaneously . 
in this type of model , rules of priority are necessary to set out what would happen in the case of conflicts or inconsistencies between two valid laws . 
the Nisga ' a treaty contains rules of priority in each case where the Nisga ' a government will have law - making authority . 
in order for Nisga ' a laws to be valid , they must be consistent with these rules of priority . 
they must meet a number of other requirements . 
first and foremost , they must be consistent with the Constitution of Canada , including the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
they also have to be consistent with the Nisga ' a Constitution itself . 
honourable senators , I wish to make it clear that the authorities I have just mentioned relating to Nisga ' a citizenship do not include the right to make laws concerning immigration , Canadian citizenship , registration as an Indian under the Indian Act , or to impose obligations on Canada or British Columbia to provide rights or benefits . 
the Nisga ' a treaty makes this abundantly clear . 
finally , there are areas where the interests of other Canadians could significantly and directly be affected by Nisga ' a law but where the public interest could still be accommodated while providing some local authority . 
in this third category , federal and provincial laws would prevail over Nisga ' a law . 
the areas where federal or provincial law would prevail include environmental assessment and protection , public order , peace and safety , health services , social services , buildings and public works , traffic and transportation , solemnization of marriage , fish and wildlife sales and the regulation of intoxicants . 
there can be no doubt raised that the Nisga ' a government will operate within Canada ' s legal framework , Canada ' s Constitution , Canada ' s laws and the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
honourable senators , the Nisga ' a people have occupied the area of the Nass for centuries before the European colonists arrived . 
the evidence shows that they had a well - organized society which was prosperous and governed according to laws of social conduct and community obligations . 
the key achievement of this treaty is to reconcile in today ' s world the fact that the Nisga ' a people have their own culture and system of government within the culture and system of the majority population . 
as I have said earlier , this is a practical and workable arrangement . 
honourable senators , one of the major objectives for treaty negotiations in British Columbia is to establish certainty in connection with the rights of aboriginal peoples , those of the federal and provincial governments , and those of individual Canadians . 
the Nisga ' a Final Agreement achieves this objective . 
it is a full and final definition of Nisga ' a claims to aboriginal rights and title . 
through this agreement , and as set out in Bill C - 9 , those rights will be known with certainty . 
in future , we will all be able to use the final agreement for a precise description of Nisga ' a rights . 
all of us will be able to use the final agreement because the treaty stipulates that it can be relied on not just by government and by the Nisga ' a but by all other persons . 
achieving certainty is of critical importance to business and labour groups in British Columbia . 
groups with interests as diverse as Canadian National Railways and the Canadian Labour Congress advised the standing committee of the other place that certainty was a core reason for their support for this treaty and treaty settlements in general . 
the Mayor of the City of Terrace , Jack Talstra , said to the standing committee : 
we wish our Nisga ' a neighbours well . 
let us move forward with this new treaty . 
honourable senators , simply put , certainty of aboriginal rights is essential to the promise of a strong economic future for British Columbia . 
in future , the Nisga ' a will be able to develop Nisga ' a lands . 
businesses that are interested in economic development opportunities on Nisga ' a lands will know from the final agreement that the Nisga ' a own these lands . 
that is what is meant in the preamble of the final agreement when it says that the final agreement is intended to provide certainty with respect to the ownership and use of lands and resources . 
those who oppose the Nisga ' a Final Agreement risk losing for all of us this opportunity . 
i say to my fellow British Columbians that such a risk is not justifiable . 
one 1991 report issued by Price Waterhouse concluded that , in that year , unresolved land claims in British Columbia cost the province $ 1 billion in investment and 1,500 jobs in forestry and mining alone . 
the cost to our aboriginal peoples is also very high because of the constraints on their own economic opportunities . 
in exchange for full and final settlement of all Nisga ' a claims in respect of aboriginal rights and title , the Nisga ' a will receive a settlement package which includes $ 196.1 million paid over 15 years and a land transfer of approximately 2,000 square kilometres in the Nass Valley area , which includes surface and subsurface rights and also a right to take a share of the Nass River salmon stocks and Nass area wildlife harvests . 
however , let us not share the misrepresentations of some that what is involved is a cash transfer of over $ 500 million . 
that is not the case at all . 
who can fully calculate the value to the Nisga ' a of having a strong land lease ? 
the Nisga ' a believe that , with this agreement , they have the opportunity , through their own efforts and skills , to become economically self - reliant . 
a prosperous Nisga ' a would have an enormous multiplier effect on the whole economy of northwest British Columbia , as the Mayor of Terrace knows . 
some in British Columbia believe it would be better to leave it to the courts to deal with aboriginal claims . 
this is a false belief . 
it would be costly and time - consuming to use the courts to examine each claim of an aboriginal right or title for each location in British Columbia . 
in the Delgamuukw case , the Supreme Court of Canada commented on the disadvantages of litigation and encouraged negotiation as the best way to resolve these issues . 
some of you might remember that the Delgamuukw case took more than 10 years to go through the courts , and in the end the Supreme Court of Canada ordered a new trial . 
there is still uncertainty as to the aboriginal rights of the Gitskan and Wet ' suwet ' en who were involved in that case . 
the certainty achieved in the Nisga ' a treaty clearly demonstrates the advantages of negotiating these issues instead of going to court . 
to achieve this objective of a practical and workable alternative , the Nisga ' a Final Agreement sets out arrangements that provide certainty in the Nass Valley as to ownership and use of lands and resources . 
very importantly , it does so within the Canadian legal framework . 
the Nisga ' a Final Agreement negotiations were not an attempt to define Nisga ' a rights but , instead , to address uncertainty by exhaustively setting out and defining , with as much clarity and precision as possible , all the section 35 rights which the Nisga ' a can exercise after the Nisga ' a Final Agreement is concluded . 
in the past , Canada has achieved certainty through an exchange of undefined aboriginal rights for defined treaty rights using the language of " cede , release and surrender . " 
objections by First Nations to the surrender technique have been a fundamental obstacle to completing modern treaties . 
the Nisga ' a Final Agreement provides for a " modification of rights " approach . 
using the modified aboriginal right approach , the Nisga ' a aboriginal rights , including title , continue to exist , although only as modified , to have the attributes and geographic extent set out in the Nisga ' a Final Agreement . 
this is accomplished through the agreement of all three parties and by the exercise of the legislative jurisdiction of the federal and provincial governments . 
as a result , whatever aboriginal rights the Nisga ' a may have had at common law will be modified to become the rights set out in the Nisga ' a Final Agreement . 
in this way , the certainty technique is based upon agreeing to rights rather than extinguishing them . 
if , despite the final agreement and the Nisga ' a Final Agreement Act , there is an aboriginal right other than or different in attributes from the Nisga ' a nation ' s section 35 rights as set out in the Nisga ' a Final Agreement , that right would be released as of the effective date . 
through the modified aboriginal rights approach , the only section 35 rights that the Nisga ' a nation would have are those set out in the final agreement . 
honourable senators , I believe that we can see the compromises , the accommodations , and the reconciliation of different views that permits the negotiation of modern , workable approaches to difficult issues . 
the fact that business , resource interests , local governments and labour organizations support the modified rights model demonstrates that those interests were heard and addressed at the negotiating table . 
many critics and opponents of the Nisga ' a Final Agreement appear to be uninterested in the facts . 
rather , they have used misrepresentations and half - truths to push emotional hot buttons in an attempt to create a negative and angry public backlash . 
senators are familiar with events in the other place in which the Official Opposition , the Reform Party , sought this objective . 
honourable senators , one of the vocal critics of this treaty is the Leader of the Official Opposition in British Columbia , Mr. Gordon Campbell . 
Mr. Campbell conceded in his submission to the standing committee in the other place that : 
British Columbians want treaties that will reconcile the constitutionally protected rights of aboriginal peoples with the sovereigny of the Crown . 
they want to negotiate settlements because that is preferable to litigated settlements imposed by the courts . 
honourable senators , that is exactly what we have done . 
Mr. Campbell charges that the Nisga ' a Final Agreement Act creates a new order of government in Canada and , as such , is , in effect , a constitutional amendment requiring , among other matters , a referendum be submitted to the people of British Columbia under prevailing provincial law to obtain a majority vote of approval . 
he has caused litigation to be commenced to seek judicial intervention and interpretation . 
it is the view of the parties to the agreement and also of constitutional experts who have appeared as witnesses in previous hearings that Mr. Campbell ' s charge has no constitutional base . 
let me refer again to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development who , in speaking in the other place on October 26 last , said : 
as significant as is the Nisga ' a treaty , it is equally significant that it has been achieved within Canada ' s existing constitutional framework . 
the Nisga ' a treaty is a practical arrangement that defines the rights the Nisga ' a people will exercise under Section 35 of the Constitution Act , 1982 . 
although rights will be protected under Section 35 , it does not mean they are absolute . 
the courts have confirmed that those rights may be infringed where proper justification exists . 
honourable senators , the Nisga ' a treaty states : 
this Agreement does not alter the Constitution of Canada including the distribution of powers between Canada and British Columbia . 
in evidence given to the standing committee in the other place on November 23 last by Dean Peter Hogg and Professor Patrick Monahan of Osgoode Law School , Professor Monahan stated : 
so essentially my view is that section 35 ( 1 ) and 35 ( 2 ) of the Constitution contemplate precisely the process that is occurring here , namely an agreement is reached between aboriginal people and the federal and / or provincial governments . 
further on , Professor Monahan says : 
that does not mean that the agreements themselves become part of the Constitution of Canada , but what it does mean is that the rights are protected and any law , federal or provincial , that was inconsistent with the rights under the agreement would have to meet the test of justification which the courts have set for infringement of rights protected by section 35 , and that was set in a case called Sparrow . 
to summarize , honourable senators , nothing contained in Bill C - 9 has any effect over the distribution of powers given to the federal and provincial governments by the Canadian Constitution . 
the legislative power remains unimpaired . 
no doubt this will be settled one day by a higher authority than even those to which I have been referring . 
a further criticism of Bill C - 9 is that it is based on race discrimination . 
for example , Dr. Keith Martin , Reform MP for Esquimalt - Juan de Fuca , in an article in The Ottawa Citizen of November 24 , 1999 , said : 
we are creating animosity and division , much like what was seen in South Africa during the years of apartheid . 
in the same article he says : 
there must also be one law for all people . 
however , Professor Bradford Morse of the Faculty of Law , University of Ottawa , said at the same hearings I mentioned previously : 
the fundamental issue that many critics fail to grasp is that aboriginal rights are not recognized for a distinct group by virtue of their race , but rather as the United States Supreme Court has clearly and repeatedly indicated for at least 170 years , certain peoples were in possession of their own territories since time immemorial as independent nations with their own legal , cultural , religious , linguistic and political system ... this is reflective of their difference as political entities , not as racial groups . 
honourable senators , the rights provided to the Nisga ' a by section 35 of our Constitution are based on their prior presence in the Nass Valley , not because of their race , as some critics have suggested . 
this self - government model reflects rights based on prior presence and is carefully drafted to ensure that the rights and interests of other Canadians , particularly those who live in the immediate area , are fully addressed . 
all private property rights are fully protected . 
all existing property rights on Nisga ' a lands will be replaced on equivalent or better terms . 
all federal and provincial laws will apply , including provincial laws which currently do not apply on Indian reserves . 
this means that there will be additional protections available for Nisga ' a women , for example , that are not available under the existing Indian Act and Indian reserve system . 
therefore , there were ample consultation opportunities on all substantive issues . 
in fact , ultimately , this negotiation included the most extensive and effective consultation process in the history of treaties in Canada . 
in his submission , Gordon Campbell also referred to a number of " equality concerns with respect to the Nisga ' a treaty " suggesting that the rule of law will not be equally applied to all British Columbians and that British Columbians will not be treated equally within Canada . 
the argument that all British Columbians should have exactly the same rights is inconsistent with the accommodation of special rights for some groups within Canada ' s Constitution . 
this view of equality would deny the Nisga ' a any treaty rights , but also suggests that there should be no aboriginal rights . 
additionally , this view of equality would deny any other special rights protected in our Constitution such as minority rights , educational rights and linguistic rights . 
honourable senators , the Nisga ' a should not have to give up their culture and language to live in this great country . 
it is possible , in Canada , to be aboriginal and to be Canadian . 
time does not permit me to deal with many of the issues raised by this historic treaty where the right of self - government of an aboriginal people is for the first time the subject of a parliamentary endorsement under section 35 . 
in many ways , the rights of non - Nisga ' a living on Nisga ' a lands are enhanced by the removal of the restrictions imposed by the Indian Act . 
in the area of taxation , the Nisga ' a have agreed , in brief , that after a phase - out period the Nisga ' a people will pay taxes the same way all other Canadians do . 
the Nisga ' a will , as their economy develops , assume a higher and higher responsibility for their own funding . 
they look forward to freeing themselves from financial dependency . 
honourable senators , I look forward to the further examination with you of Bill C - 9 . 
i believe that , after we have given careful study to the bill , we will endorse it wholeheartedly . 
i believe that Terry Glavin , a member of the Pacific Fisheries Resource Conservation Council in British Columbia , speaking on November 17 last in Prince George , summed the matter up well for his fellow British Columbians when he said : 
i am confident in the knowledge that the overwhelming majority of British Columbians support the objective of concluding treaties with First Nations that are reasonable and fair and uphold the honour of the Crown . 
later in his remarks he said : 
by way of epilogue , honourable senators , it should be noted that a few senators present here today played a significant role in the Joint Committee of the Senate and the House of Commons on the Constitution in 1980 - 81 which held hearings and deliberations on what became the Canada Act and the Constitution Act , 1982 . 
those were historic days : the Charter of Rights , the patriation of the Constitution , and many other significant issues which , taken together , have changed the nature of Canada , very much for the better , in my opinion . 
as significant as any matter which was enacted at the time was section 35 . 
a number of senators and MPs were much moved when the then justice minister , Jean Chr é tien , under heavy pressure from the joint committee , agreed on behalf of the Trudeau government to put section 35 into the Constitution . 
in Bill C - 9 we see one of the substantial results of our efforts at that time . 
the joint committee was chaired by the late Senator Harry Hays and by a feisty MP from Quebec , the now feisty Senator Serge Joyal . 
i represented the government side in the Senate while the opposition side was led by former senator Duff Roblin . 
one of the permanent members from the other place whose attendance record was exemplary is now Senator Eymard Corbin . 
i apologize to anyone now in the Senate whom I have not mentioned who also sat on the joint committee as a permanent member . 
in closing , I will observe that there is something valuable to be contributed to public policy by a Senate where some of its members have a perspective that spans nearly 20 years . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , I agree that this agreement - it is not a treaty - falls under the Constitution , under the Charter of Rights and under the Criminal Code . 
this is a great amount . 
only one point concerns me - and perhaps this question should be studied more deeply in the committee - namely , the concurrent powers with paramountcy for the Nisga ' a . 
that is unprecedented in the sense that there is a division of powers in Canadian federalism - federal powers and provincial powers . 
sometimes the paramountcy is with the Parliament of Canada , and sometimes the paramountcy is in the hands of the provincial legislatures . 
this system works very well . 
i am told - and correct me if I am wrong - that a few subjects that are concurrent with paramountcy are neither federal nor provincial , in which case it may be that there is a cloud somewhere in the agreement . 
if the agreement does not change the division of powers between Ottawa and the provinces , I am quite satisfied . 
is that the case ? 
senator Austin : 
i wish to thank Senator Beaudoin for that question . 
as I said in my address , a specific clause states that this agreement does not in any way affect the distribution of powers between Canada and the Province of British Columbia . 
therefore , we have the concept of section 35 protecting the rights contained within this agreement . 
those rights are given constitutional protection , but in no way does this affect the distribution of powers . 
we have a Constitution composed of federal and provincial agreement , which protects aboriginal rights once Parliament and the Province of British Columbia ratify the agreement by legislation . 
senator Beaudoin : 
i have absolutely no problem with section 35 because it gives collective rights to the aboriginal people in the Constitution of Canada . 
i am 100 per cent in favour of those rights because the aboriginals were here first . 
my question relates only to paramountcy in concurrent powers . 
when this bill is studied by a Senate committee , I hope this question will be studied more adequately . 
i do not have any problem with the rest of the agreement . 
senator Austin : 
i look forward to that study . 
the honourable senator raises an essential point . 
i believe that the Nisga ' a Tribal Council will have paramountcy in some powers , particularly in the area of linguistic and cultural rights . 
however , they are still subject to the concept of reasonableness as laid out in the Sparrow case because the Sparrow case is part of our constitutional law . 
hon. Gerald J . Comeau : 
honourable senators , I listened carefully to the honourable senator ' s speech , and one of my questions concerns the Nass River salmon allocation . 
however , there is a means by which the minister and the Crown can allocate fish , and that is through section 7 of the Fisheries Act . 
they can even create exclusive reserves of fish , which is what is being contemplated in the Nisga ' a treaty . 
this must be done by a competent piece of legislation , as noted in section 7 of the act . 
the treaty provides for an exclusive fishery , which will then be protected under section 35 of the Constitution . 
the result is that parliamentarians will relinquish their legislative power over the allocation of this common - property resource . 
for one of the first times in history , parliamentarians will relinquish a duty , constitutionally mandated , to protect a public resource . 
was this contemplated by the negotiators , or have you been given any briefing on this subject ? 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I am not as well prepared as is Senator Comeau to examine at this moment the exact ramifications with respect to the fishery . 
i know that the Fisheries Act and regulations apply to harvests under this Nisga ' a agreement . 
an annual fishing plan must be provided , and the Nisga ' a have , as the Honourable Senator Comeau said , an agreement by right to a specific share of the fish harvest . 
i believe your question will be better answered during the course of committee discussions . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
i have a question for Senator Austin . 
section 35 of the Constitution Act , 1982 , is one section beyond sections 1 to 34 , which constitute the Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
is it correct to state that the Charter of Rights and Freedoms does not apply to section 35 but that under this treaty the Charter of Rights and Freedoms will apply ? 
in effect , I believe the Charter applies under this agreement , which gives greater protection from a human rights analysis than something that is simply under section 35 . 
senator Austin : 
senator Kinsella : 
honourable senators , as we begin our debate on the principle of the bill , I wish to clarify the rights that Indian women have under Bill C - 31 , the amendment to the Indian Act that repealed paragraph 12 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the old Indian Act . 
some describe that as the " right of return . " 
is that right continued under the Nisga ' a agreement , or is it lesser or greater protection for women who return to the Nisga ' a community ? 
senator Austin : 
honourable senators , I cannot answer that question except in a general way by saying that as the Charter applies and the Charter bars discrimination , I believe that the rights of Nisga ' a women have been elevated to the same rights that all women have in Canadian society . 
royal ASSENT 
notice 
the Hon. the Speaker informed the Senate that the following communication had been received : 
December 16 , 1999 
Mr. Speaker : 
i have the honour to inform you that the Right Honourable Antonio Lamer , Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , in his capacity as Deputy Governor General , will proceed to the Senate Chamber today , the 16 th day of December , 1999 , at 5:00 p.m. for the purpose of giving Royal Assent to certain Bills . 
the Honourable The Speaker of the Senate Ottawa 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , you will have noted from my reading that the retiring Chief Justice will be attending this evening . 
this will be his last Royal Assent before he retires , and it will also , presumably , be the last Royal Assent of this millennium . 
i hope that all honourable senators will be able to attend the reception for the Chief Justice at the conclusion of Royal Assent . 
parliament of Canada Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming the debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Grafstein , seconded by the Honourable Senator Callbeck , for the second reading of the Bill S - 5 , An Act to amend the Parliament of Canada Act ( Parliamentary Poet Laureate ) . - ( 
honourable Senator Hays ) . 
hon. Eymard G . Corbin : 
honourable senators , Senator Grafstein knows that I do not have much enthusiasm for his bill . 
nevertheless , I am grateful to him for making this suggestion to the Senate . 
if I have understood correctly , the purpose of Bill S - 5 is to institutionalize poetry by creating the position of Parliamentary Poet Laureate . 
my timetable did not afford me the time to prepare my reservations as I would have wished . 
but since Senator Grafstein has been urging me for the last 48 hours to speak before we adjourn for the holidays , so that the bill can be referred to a committee for consideration and the hearing of the witnesses it chooses , I will try today to accommodate him , but this will not necessarily be my last word . 
he has had the time to prepare , to give the matter thought , and to seek and receive opinions . 
he has had months to do so . 
now he wants the rare few in Parliament who live and breathe literature to race headlong into the waves of his enthusiasm . 
he must , however , know that the products of the intellectual process , the quantity of which he sometimes deplores , require time for research , reflection and writing . 
in the end , I will help my honourable colleague , because the clash of ideas is never a waste of time . 
that having been said , I now learn that the debate will be adjourned after my remarks . 
as if by chance , but what a fortunate coincidence , on the weekend I was rereading Edgar Allan Poe , sa vie et ses ouvrages , written by Charles Baudelaire in 1852 . 
i hold these two great poets , literary giants whom I have not abandoned over the years , in the greatest esteem . 
you should therefore know that I am biased . 
i found this sentence written by Beaudelaire : 
Alfred de Vigny wrote a book ( Stello , 1832 ) to demonstrate that the place of poetry is not in a republic , an absolute monarchy or a constitutional monarchy ... 
and Beaudelaire added : 
... and no one answered . 
Stello defends a very particular point of view , which I share almost entirely . 
i do not have the time , for the reason mentioned at the beginning of my speech , to get into details . 
to be honest , and without claiming that Stello can be transposed mutatis mutandis from 1830 to the current situation of poetry , there is a fundamental consideration to keep in mind , at least from my point of view . 
he says : 
to separate poetic life from political life . 
and to achieve that : 
render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar ' s , that is the right to be , every hour of every day , held in contempt on the street , deceived in the palace , fought against underhandedly , undermined for a long time , beaten promptly and expelled violently . 
here is Dr. Noir ' s second precept to the poet : 
alone and free , to accomplish one ' s mission . 
to follow the condition of one ' s self , free from the influence of Associations , however good . 
because Solitude alone is the source of inspiration . 
there is a lot more , but that is the essential . 
the essential is the very nature of creative poetic work , and this cannot be compelled . 
a writer of verse , a rhymester paid by the verse yes , perhaps , but not a true poet , never ! 
i cannot imagine that true poet could take on the yoke of the official word . 
in fact , it seems to me that the question needs to be asked in another way . 
what sort of line divides language and power ? 
i would say that it is something as slim as the guillotine blade that beheaded the poet Andr é Ch é nier . 
i would also say that it once took the form of the Index librorum or of the tribunal of Rome that condemned the poems of Baudelaire and cursed so many others . 
that will give hon. senators just a very small idea of what is involved , to emphasize that poetry owes no allegiance to Caesars , to popes , to emperors , to despots of any kind . 
and all honour to the poet for that . 
today , the line between language and politics is as wide as the distance that separates a persecuted poet in exile from his native land . 
unfortunately , I did not have the time to read what my honourable friend Senator Kinsella had to say . 
i shall do so during the adjournment , after the holiday season . 
i do believe , however , from having heard his closing words the other day , that he is indulging in some out - of - date nostalgia . 
i will soon have a clearer idea , and if I have misinterpreted what he has said , I will be prepared to apologize . 
in my opinion , Senator Grafstein ' s proposal smacks of musty Victorian attitudes , although I must apologize for saying so when we have that lovely bust adorning the front of this chamber , just above His Honour the Speaker ' s head . 
what has happened to our ability to dream , our talent to explore ? 
it is as if we Canadians still had one foot on either side of a yawning abyss , one as deep and vast as the ocean that separates us from our mother countries , torn between our past and the challenges of our future . 
might grasping on to an empty practice or meaningless symbol not be one more manifestation of our national insecurity ? 
it is as if we lacked the maturity to do anything new . 
are we so lacking ? 
i thought , but perhaps I was deluding myself , that our democratic tradition was strong enough for us to shake off the fetters of old ways of doing and being . 
i am not speaking for the poets , I am expressing a profound conviction of mine . 
on the motion of Senator Kinsella , on behalf of Senator Lynch - Staunton , the debate was adjourned . 
immigration Act 
bill to Amend - Second Reading - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I would ask for leave to have this item stand in the name of the Honourable Senator Grafstein who intends to speak to it . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators , that this order stand in the name of the Honourable Senator Grafstein ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
order stands . 
official Languages 
second Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages ( bilingual nature of Canada ' s Capital ) presented in the Senate on December 14 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Losier - Cool ) . 
hon. Rose - Marie Losier - Cool : 
honourable senators , I move that this report be adopted . 
in so moving , I wish to quote the Right Honourable Pierre Elliott Trudeau , who said at the ceremony to proclaim the Constitution on April 17 , 1982 : 
i speak of a Canada where men and women of aboriginal ancestry , of French and British heritage , of the diverse cultures of the world , demonstrate the will to share this land in peace , in justice , and with mutual respect . 
i speak of a Canada which is proud of , and strengthened by its essential bilingual destiny , a Canada whose people believe in sharing and in mutual support , and not in building regional barriers . 
it is in the spirit of this vision that the Standing Joint Committee on Official Languages believes in and works for the defence of the promotion of the linguistic rights of anglophone and francophone communities in Canada , and it is also in the spirit of this vision that the members of the committee are moving that this second report presented December 14 be adopted . 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , we agree with the recommendations contained in the report presented by the Honourable Senator Losier - Cool ' s and we are prepared to support the motion for the adoption of the report . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
scrutiny of Regulations 
first Report of Joint Committee Adopted 
hon. C é line Hervieux - Payette : 
honourable senators , I move that this report be adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
European Monetary Union 
report of Foreign Affairs Committee on Study - Order Stands 
on the Order : 
hon. Peter A . Stollery : 
honourable senators , I should like Order No. 4 to remain standing in my name . 
i believe that I owe honourable senators a word of explanation since this matter has been on the Order Paper for 12 days . 
i have taken this matter over from Senator Stewart who recently retired . 
the Foreign Affairs Committee has been quite busy of late . 
i will get around to dealing with this matter , but I have not had time thus far . 
order stands . 
order in Council Issued Pursuant to Canada Transportation Act to Allow Discusssions on Private sector proposal to purchase airline - report of transport and communications committee on study adopted 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the third report of the Standing Senate Committee on Transport and Communications ( power to hire staff ) presented in the Senate on December 15 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Bacon ) . 
hon. Lise Bacon : 
honourable senators , I move that this report be adopted . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , is it your pleasure to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Inquiry - Debated Suspended 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Poulin calling the attention of the Senate to the decision of the Ontario Government not to adopt a recommendation to declare the proposed restructured City of Ottawa a bilingual region . - ( 
honourable Senator Fraser ) . 
hon. Joan Fraser : 
honourable senators , when I speak in this chamber I generally try to use both of Canada ' s official languages . 
today , however , I shall speak only in English , as I join my voice with the voices of those who are urging the Government of Ontario to pass legislation stating that the proposed mega - city of Ottawa will be officially bilingual . I 
shall speak only in English because I believe it is important to recognize that this is a question that concerns allCanadians - anglophones , francophones , what we in Quebec have learned to call allophones , and native peoples , whether we speak both official languages or only one or , indeed , neither . 
there are many reasons why Ottawa , the City of Ottawa , not just the federal government ' s National Capital Region , should be officially bilingual . 
the first reason , on a human level , surely is simply that so many francophones - 125,000 , I believe - live here . 
i know how it feels to see your own provincial government reluctant to acknowledge that your language community is legitimate , entitled to full recognition for what it is : a branch of one of this country ' s founding peoples . 
i know how it feels to have your provincial government say , in effect , " Look how well we treat you . 
you should be grateful for all the good things we do for you . 
just do not ask for recognition or acknowledgement of what you are . 
do not expect anything as a right . 
how does it feel ? 
honourable senators , it hurts . 
it makes you feel that , in your own home , your own province , you are not seen as a full citizen , even though your ancestors helped to build this land and the Constitution recognizes your language as one of the two official languages of the country . 
honourable senators , we all know that , over the past generation , successive governments of Ontario , including the present government , have made impressive efforts to create and extend a very broad range of French language services and to help francophones to build and control their vital community institutions . 
while we may all deeply regret the situation at the Montfort Hospital , and while we may hope , as I do , that it will be satisfactorily resolved , it is also important to recognize that the present government of Ontario moved to create francophone control of French schools . 
that is no small matter . 
i commend the Government of Ontario for taking that step . 
we all understand that are members of the federal Parliament and that , in Canada , it is the provinces which have jurisdiction over municipalities . 
we know that the creation of the mega - city is a matter which comes under provincial jurisdiction . 
i am sure that none of us disputes that or would wish to dispute it . 
it is also indisputable that Ottawa is a special case . 
it is an Ontario municipality , yes , but it is not a municipality like any other because it is Ottawa and only Ottawa that is the national capital . 
the National Capital Region is not the capital . 
it is a region , a beautiful region , appropriately created and administered , a wonderful physical recognition of the importance of the capital to all Canadians ; but Ottawa , the City of Ottawa , is the capital . 
in Canada , we have two official languages . 
that fact goes to the very heart of our history , of our existence as a country . 
it is one of the pillars of our identity and of our national policies . 
how can it be that the capital city of the country should not officially reflect that wonderful fact ? 
what message does it send to Canadians , not just to francophones but to all Canadians , when we say that even if we have two official languages , only one of them is really official here in the national capital itself ? 
honourable senators , last spring I had the privilege of visiting Brussels , the capital city of a country with linguistic difficulties that sometimes make our own arguments look like child ' s play . 
you know , I am sure , that Belgium is divided into French and Flemish areas but Brussels is formally , in law and in practice , bilingual . 
that is how it should be and that , I suggest , is a model for us to carefully consider . 
i am aware of the argument that , if we insist that Ottawa be bilingual , we must also insist that Hull be bilingual . 
that raises a whole different provincial matter . 
as an English Quebecer , I may fervently wish that the Government of Quebec would designate Hull as an officially bilingual community in the same way that it has recognized bilingual status for a number of other municipalities , including the one in which I live . 
that , however , does not affect the Ottawa question at all . 
i am sure , honourable senators , that we were all pleased to see that the city council of Ottawa has asked Ontario to make the mega - city bilingual . 
i understand that it is , in fact , only the provincial government that can make any municipality of Ontario bilingual . 
there have been court cases to that effect . 
we know that there is some resistance to this step in some quarters . 
all of the explicit resistance of which I am aware comes from anglophones and much of it seems to be expressed in terms of fear , fear of what bilingual status for the national capital would mean to the anglophones who live here . 
fear of change is , of course , common and sometimes that fear is justified , butsome change is positive . 
some change serves to build a better future for our country and for all of us who are so privileged as to be citizens of it . 
we can come to embrace that change . 
i think of my own parents , anglophones from Nova Scotia , proud of their roots which stretched back 200 years in this country . 
they never spoke French . 
to the best of my knowledge , not one of their ancestors spoke French - Gaelic , yes , but not French . 
when my parents were growing up , the question of bilingualism and biculturalism was not even on the horizon . 
in the 1960 s , when English Canada at last came to understand that element of the country ' s history and identity and future , my parents were among the millions of English Canadians who came to realize it too , who came to rejoice in this country ' s bilingual , bicultural identity . 
they did not learn French , but they made it their business to see that I did because they believed that every Canadian who could have that opportunity should speak both languages of Canada . 
they were proud that I learned to do so . 
i am eternally grateful to them for having given me that opportunity . 
why do we have flags , for example , if symbolism does not matter ? 
symbolism matters enormously to all of us . 
where does it matter more than in the capital of the country ? 
finally , I suggest that , if Ottawa is a city not like the others , Ontario is a province not like the others . 
it has been a contributor to so many of the elements of our identity of which we are proud - the tolerance , the openness , and the level - headedness on which we pride ourselves . 
i urge the Government of Ontario , once again , to assume its historic role of leadership . 
as we have heard in this chamber today and previously , very serious consideration is being given to other avenues to achieve for Ottawa the bilingual status which I believe it deserves . 
a court case is planned by our colleague , the Honourable Senator Joyal , perhaps the most indefatigable fighter for minority rights that we know . 
there are considerations of possible federal action . 
if it comes to that , then it will have to come to that , but how much better if the Government of Ontario could do as so many of its predecessors have done and assert its leadership and its historic role as a proud guardian of what is best about Canada . 
with my whole heart , I urge the Government of Ontario to hear the pleas that have come from this chamber and from so many Canadians . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable Senator Beaudoin , I must unfortunately inform you that there is only one minute remaining before I must leave the Chair for Royal Assent . 
once that is concluded , we will continue the debate . 
honourable senators , the Senate will now adjourn during pleasure to await the arrival of the Right Honourable Deputy of Her Excellency the Governor General . 
royal ASSENT 
i have the honour to inform you that Her Excellency the Governor General has been pleased to cause Letters Patent to be issued under her Sign Manual and Signet constituting the Honourable Antonio Lamer , Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada , Her Deputy , to do in Her Excellency ' s name all acts on Her part necessary to be done during Her Excellency ' s pleasure . 
the commission was read by a Clerk at the Table . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to give the Royal Assent to the following bill : 
an Act to implement the Agreement among the Government of Canada , Governments of Member States of the European Space Agency , the Government of Japan , the Government of the Russian Federation , and the Government of the United States of America concerning Cooperation on the Civil International Space Station and to make related amendments to other Acts , ( Bill C - 4 , Chapter 1 , 1999 ) 
the Honourable Gilbert Parent , Speaker of the House of Commons , then addressed the Honourable the Deputy Governor General as follows : 
may it please Your Honour : 
the Commons of Canada have voted certain supplies required to enable the Government to defray the expenses of the public service . 
in the name of the Commons , I present to Your Honour the following bill : 
an Act for granting to Her Majesty certain sums of money for the public service of Canada for the financial year ending March 31 , 2000 , ( Bill C - 21 , Chapter 2 , 1999 ) 
to which bill I humbly request Your Honour ' s assent . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to give the Royal Assent to the said bill . 
the House of Commons withdrew . 
the Honourable the Deputy Governor General was pleased to retire . 
Ontario 
regional Restructuring Legislation - Refusal to Declare Ottawa Officially Bilingual - Inquiry - Debate Continued 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the Honourable Senator Poulin calling the attention of the Senate to the decision of the Ontario Government not to adopt a recommendation to declare the proposed restructured City of Ottawa a bilingual region . - ( 
honourable Senator Fraser ) . 
hon. G é rald - A . 
honourable senators , Canada is a bilingual and multicultural federation , as has been acknowledged in our various constitutional laws from 1867 to this day . 
it is to be expected that the capital of this country would also be bilingual . 
a number of federal states have bilingual , if not multilingual , capital cities . 
it is true that , under the terms of the Canadian Constitution , the municipalities fall under provincial jurisdiction , according to section 92 ( 8 ) of the Constitution Act , 1867 . 
in other words , the structures and powers of a municipal council are a provincial matter . 
the division of jurisdictions must be respected . 
however , Ottawa is not just any city ; it is the capital of Canada . 
at the heart of this country , the major federal institutions are bilingual , the federal Parliament , the Supreme Court of Canada , Rideau Hall , and the various departments . 
section 16 of the Constitution of Canada addresses the capital and declares that the seat of the federal government is in Ottawa . 
in Munro , 1966 , the Supreme Court of Canada recognized that the federal Parliament may pass legislation on the national capital by virtue of its residual powers and by virtue of the clause on peace , order and good governance . 
in this case , the Supreme Court recognized the power of the federal Parliament to create a national capital region and a National Capital Commission , and to empower that commission to expropriate land for the beautification of the country ' s capital . 
this National Capital Commission is subject to the Official Languages Act because it is a body established under federal legislation . 
the federal Official Languages Act , which puts the use of the English and French languages in federal institutions on an equal footing , is based on the residual powers of the Canadian Parliament , as set out in Jones in 1975 , a unanimous ruling by the highest court in our land . 
part VII of the Official Languages Act makes provision for a certain extension of bilingualism , giving it an obligatory value in addition to its declaratory value in law . 
under the Constitution , therefore , there is a certain division of powers in the area that concerns us . 
section 16 of the Constitution Act , 1867 , was interpreted broadly and , in my opinion , must continue to be so interpreted . 
certain legal experts have already examined the question of a true federal district , like Washington and many other federal capitals . 
they have studied the question of having a capital on both sides of the Ottawa River , as well as the question of having a federal district on both sides . 
i do not wish to get into this debate today , because this is not what is before us . 
the issue before us , however , is nothing less than that of a bilingual capital . 
that is already something . 
in support of his argument in favour of a bilingual capital , my colleague Senator Serge Joyal has already mentioned the principles identified by the Supreme Court in the Reference on the Secession of Quebec to guide the negotiations between Quebec and Canada or between a province and Canada - constitutionality , democracy , the rule of law , respect for minorities , and federalism . 
if these principles apply in the case of secession , they certainly apply for the renewal of federalism . 
i will conclude my legal speech with the comments of Justice Cartwright , in Munro , with respect to the theory of national interest : 
i find it difficult to suggest a subject matter of legislation which more clearly goes beyond local or provincial interests and is the concern of Canada as a whole than the development , conservation and improvement of the National Capital Region . 
in the reference on the 1976 Anti - Inflation Act , Justice Jean Beetz wrote : 
some will surely argue that there is a difference between the capital and the capital region . 
i have come to the conclusion that the capital of our country must be bilingual . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Serge Joyal : 
honourable senators , I listened with great interest to the comments made by Senator Beaudoin . 
i wish to bring to his attention a qualifier regarding his statement on Part VII of the Official Languages Act , which the Official Languages Committee had the opportunity to review . 
this week , Senator Gauthier gave me information on the precise nature of Part VII. 
you said that Part VII was obligatory and not merely declaratory . 
there is currently a case before the Federal Court of Canada in which the declaratory nature of Part VII of the Official Languages Act is being challenged . 
since it is not covered by the sections of the act dealing with possible legal remedies , that part of the act escapes the reviews and orders of Canadian courts . 
i do not share that opinion in the context of the reference to the Supreme Court of Canada on the secession of Quebec . 
this matter was raised by Senator Gauthier and yourself , Madam Speaker pro tempore , in your capacity as chair of the Committee on Official Languages . 
this matter is currently before the courts . 
by the time it gets to the summation stage , the arguments developed by the Ontario Superior Court in the Montfort Hospital case will be useful to the federal court , which will have to reach a decision in order to clarify once and for all the entire real application of Part VII of the Official Languages Act . 
as you are aware , it would be extremely important to define the responsibility of the Canadian government with respect to its role in actively promoting the support of official language minorities , both English and French . 
i wanted to focus my colleague ' s attention on this important element , which Senators Gauthier and Losier - Cool emphasized in their exchanges relating to the work of this committee . 
senator Beaudoin : 
honourable senators , basically we all want the same thing . 
if there is a challenge , we hope it will be turned down and that it will be found that Part VII of the Official Languages Act has imperative value , not merely declaratory value . 
this always reminds me of the famous section 133 decision , in which a lower court had declared the use of French to be indicative , not imperative . 
in a 9 to 0 decision , the Supreme Court corrected this by stating that when the Constitution speaks clearly and precisely , it is imperative . 
we are all fighting for the same outcome . 
it is contested , but this is our system . 
very strong arguments may be raised , claiming that this Official Languages Act has an imperative character in Part VII. 
we must try to lay our arguments before in court . 
hon. Ione Christensen : 
honourable senators , as a unilingual Canadian , I wish to add my voice to the debate on the decision of the Ontario government not to adopt a recommendation to declare the proposed restructured City of Ottawa a bilingual region . 
coming from the furthest western corner of Canada , I find it ludicrous that we should even be having this debate . 
that the capital of Canada would be anything but bilingual is unthinkable . 
canada and bilingualism are synonymous ; they are one . 
since 1898 , the Yukon has had a very active and proud francophone community . 
today , they are represented by the Association francophone Yukonnaise . 
there is a francophone school and attendance in the French immersion programs of our education system is very high . 
Canadians from across Canada have come to the Yukon to have their children learn and share in the great dual linguistic culture . 
this is neither a municipal issue , a provincial issue , nor a fiscal jurisdiction issue . 
it is a unity issue . 
the reaction coming from the province that borders on Canada ' s largest group of French - speaking Canadians is unbelievably insensitive . 
bilingualism is a given . 
Ottawa , our national capital , should reflect our duality and we must accept nothing less . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , an agreement has been reached . 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
report of Aboriginal Peoples Committee on Study Adopted 
leave having been given to revert to Reports of Committees : 
the Senate proceeded to consideration of the second report of the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples ( power to hire staff ) presented in the Senate on December 15 , 1999 . - ( Honourable Senator Watt ) . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate ) moved the adoption of the report . 
motion agreed to and report adopted . 
social Affairs , Science and Technology 
committee Authorized to Study State of Heath Care System 
on the Order : 
resuming debate on the motion of the Honourable Senator Kirby , seconded by the Honourable Senator Mercier : 
that the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology be authorized to examine and report upon the state of the health care system in Canada . 
in particular , the Committee shall be authorized to examine : 
( a ) The fundamental principles on which Canada ' s publicly funded health care system is based ; 
( b ) The historical development of Canada ' s health care system ; 
( c ) Publicly funded health care systems in foreign jurisdictions ; 
( d ) The pressures on and constraints of Canada ' s health care system ; and 
( e ) The role of the federal government in Canada ' s health care system ; 
that the Committee submit its final report no later than December 14 , 2001 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit any report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . - ( 
honourable Senator Di Nino ) . 
hon. Marjory LeBreton : 
honourable senators , as Deputy Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs , Science and Technology , I wish to make a few comments on this motion . 
it is significant that some of the last few words to be spoken in the Senate in this millennium are on this matter . 
it is appropriate because , as we begin the new millennium , we will be seeking authority from the Senate to examine and report upon the state of the health care system in Canada . 
this is urgently required and is something that the Senate is particularly suited to doing , as opposed to the House of Commons where other events often get in the way of studies of this nature . 
honourable senators , I support this initiative , as do other members of the committee . 
we must study this issue seriously . 
there are many myths about the health care system in Canada . 
there are many realities that we must face . 
we must eventually ask what the role of the federal government is and how the system will be economically viable . 
i respectfully request that authorization for this study be granted . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
do any other honourable senators wish to speak ? 
hon. Michael Kirby : 
honourable senators , I will make only two very short comments . 
first , in light of the discussion held in this chamber last week about the potential cost of the study , let me clarify that the committee envisions spending no more than $ 10,000 between now and March 31 , 2000 . 
second , with respect to the next fiscal year , we do not think it would be a terribly expensive study because we intend to do our international comparisons largely by way of video teleconference , which the Banking Committee discovered works extremely well . 
although the terms of reference are broad , I do not anticipate this being a terribly expensive study . 
finally , honourable senators , I should like to make one comment about the way we hope to manage this study . 
i believe Senator Carstairs , in talking about the way the committee handled Bill C - 6 , made the observation that in this place the steering committee technically consists of two Liberals and one Conservative . 
similarly , when the steering committee started to work on developing terms of reference for this study , we asked Senator Keon to join us . 
senator Keon was able to help us get a handle on what the terms of reference were to be and gave us ideas about how this should be handled . 
the first thing this morning , I sent him a note telling him how important I thought it was that he continue to play a role in this study . 
some Hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
senator Kirby : 
we would operate , just as we did on Bill C - 6 , with a four - person steering committee , consisting of Senator Carstairs and myself on this side , and Senator LeBreton and Senator Keon on the other . 
i hope that honourable senators will try to ensure that we get the value of Senator Keon ' s expertise in going through the work of this study over the next couple of years . 
honourable senators , those are my comments . 
in talking to senators on both sides of the house , I know that there is considerable interest in this study . 
the Hon. the Speaker pro tempore : 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
foreign Affairs 
committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study of Changing Mandate of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
hon. Peter A . Stollery , pursuant to notice of December 9 , 1999 , moved : 
that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until March 31 , 2000 ; and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
motion agreed to . 
recommendations of Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples Respecting Aboriginal Governance 
aboriginal Peoples Committee Authorized to Extend Date of Final Report on Study 
hon. Landon Pearson , for Senator Watt , pursuant to notice of December 14 , 1999 , moved : 
that , notwithstanding the Order of the Senate adopted on Wednesday , November 24 , 1999 , the Standing Senate Committee on Aboriginal Peoples be authorized to examine and report on the recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on Aboriginal Peoples ( Sessional Paper 2 / 35 - 508 . ) 
respecting Aboriginal governance and , in particular , seek the comments of Aboriginal Peoples and of other interested parties on : 
2 . the mechanisms of implementing such new structural relationships ; and 
3 . the models of Aboriginal self - government required to respond to the needs of Aboriginal Peoples and to complement these new structural relationships ; 
that the Committee be empowered to submit its final report no later than February 16 , 2000 , and that the Committee retain all powers necessary to publicize the findings of the Committee contained in the final report until February 29 , 2000 , and 
that the Committee be permitted , notwithstanding usual practices , to deposit its report with the Clerk of the Senate , if the Senate is not then sitting ; and that the report be deemed to have been tabled in the Chamber . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate 
motion in Support of Declaring Ottawa Officially Bilingual Adopted 
hon. Jean - Robert Gauthier , pursuant to notice of December 15 , 1999 , moved : 
that , in the opinion of the Senate of Canada , Ottawa , Canada ' s capital city , should be officially bilingual . 
i hope that this debate will continue to be apolitical . 
in this country ' s Constitution , both these languages have equal status and privileges . 
this motion calls on the Province of Ontario to declare the new City of Ottawa officially bilingual . 
a check in the dictionary shows that the word " official " means : 
... emanating from an authority that is recognized , duly sanctioned , authorized , et cetera ... 
as far as I am concerned , the new City of Ottawa must be officially bilingual , thus conferring equal status on Canada ' s two official languages , and must come under provincial jurisdiction . 
i will explain . 
yesterday evening , in the course of the debate , I said clearly that the Province of Ontario must declare the national capital bilingual . 
many of you took part in the debate and I thank you , for this strengthens our position . 
in addition , Mr. Shortliffe noted in his report on municipal restructuring that it would be up to the council of the municipality of Ottawa to determine the extent and nature of services to be made available in the country ' s two official languages . 
there is no doubt that an Ontario municipality may decide , via a bylaw , that it will provide certain services in both of this country ' s official languages . 
a municipal bylaw may change very rapidly , depending on the mood of a particular municipal council , and this does not lend much certainty to the exercise of both official languages . 
i will close by stating that our objective in the Senate has always been to represent this country ' s regions and , in particular , to defend its minorities . 
that is why I am pleased today to note the participation in this debate by a number of you , and I trust that you will also be numerous in supporting the motion . 
honourable senators , I was born in Ottawa . 
i have lived here all my life . 
i have trouble imagining that the capital of my country could be unilingual only , or to put it in more optimistically , could not be bilingual . 
i call upon my friends in the Senate to support this motion . 
hon. No ë l A . Kinsella ( Deputy Leader of the Opposition ) : 
honourable senators , it is an honour for me to second this motion , which is very important . 
i imagine that hon. senators can understand why an opposition senator , who is also a senator representing New Brunswick , would feel duty - bound to second this motion with conviction . 
ours is an officially bilingual province . 
senator Nolin : 
the only one . 
senator Kinsella : 
the only province in Canada to be officially bilingual . 
senator Louis Robichaud was a pioneer , in that he was the author of the first official languages legislation in our province . 
i must also mention the contribution of Senator Simard , who continues to promote bilingualism in our province . 
for us New Brunswickers , it is logical for the capital of our country to be bilingual . 
it is a matter of principle , and it is my duty and responsibility as a senator for New Brunswick to emphasize this and to second this motion . 
hon. Marcel Prud ' homme : 
honourable senators , all those who are aware of my longtime friendship with Senator Gauthier know very well that I could not remain silent . 
i fully support the comments made by Senators Kinsella and Gauthier . 
it is not that I do not feel comfortable in the other official language . 
i have been working on it every day since I first arrived in the other place , and if it were not for Senator Rossiter and a few others who correct my English , you would see that I still have a lot to learn . 
i always thought of myself as Senator Gauthier ' s assistant . 
that was a joke some did not appreciate , but I was never ashamed to say that I shared his concerns . 
he is the one who opened the doors for me among the minorities who fight for the survival of the French fact across Canada . 
he put me in touch with all his contacts , in British Columbia , Alberta and even in provinces that are a little less receptive . 
honourable senators , it is very easy to be divisive in order to be popular . 
for those who have known me on the other side and at times here , you know how passionately I can argue either side . 
i could be very popular with a group of Canadians but , at the same time , denounce those who may not agree with me . 
it is too easy to do so . 
i have done it in your province , Your Honour , in the 1960 s , when I was a guest speaker for the Daughters of the Eastern Star , who had rejected me as a speaker . 
i was supposed to bring greetings from Mr. Pearson , who had to return to Ottawa . 
instead of going back to Quebec to denounce the who rejected me , I went directly there and pretended that I did not get the message . 
do you know how many friends I made among the Daughters of the Eastern Star ? 
i have been hit more often than not for some political opinions that I have on other issues . 
i have never chosen the easy road , which is to denounce . 
there are those who almost assassinate you , sometimes , because of your political opinion on any given issue . 
even in my old age , I continue to hope that I can persuade people . 
they are now in Mr. Pettigrew ' s district . 
half of them have never been interested in politics ; and half of them were very sad about the process and did not share our political opinion here . 
however , after less than half an hour of patience and explanation , they now want to come back to see honourable senators at work because they saw the members of the House of Commons earlier today . 
i wish to join with Senator Kinsella and thank our friend , le grand champion . 
it is not easy to be a champion in Ontario or in other provinces . 
this is why I congratulate Senator Kinsella . 
he is not afraid to express his opinion . 
i could name all the other ones , but I will abstain because I might forget some . 
i mention Senator Kinsella because he made his views known , and I thank him for that . 
i assure him of my unfailing friendship and I will be by his side to fight the good cause , the Canadian cause , but a Canadian cause that is well understood . 
it is too easy to go around the world and claim what Canada is all about but then forget about what you said when you return home . 
i just returned from Pakistan , among other places . 
they see in Canada things that Canadians hardly can see . 
you cannot travel freely outside many countries like we can in Canada , and then return home and refuse to work for democracy . 
it is a country that is in the making every day . 
that demands patience . 
sometimes , you must refrain from trying to get even , as some of us do . 
honourable senators , each of us has a duty . 
we should rededicate ourselves to Canada . 
this can be done if only 100 senators attended 10 events a year to defend Canada and to explain what it is all about to be Canadian . 
that is what Senator Gauthier is trying to do , and that is what I am trying to do in my own way . 
hon. Norman K . Atkins : 
honourable senators , I want to congratulate Senator Gauthier on his motion . 
i think it is appropriate that the last order on the Order Paper in this millennium is this issue . 
as an Ontario senator who is not bilingual - and , I am sorry for that - I simply hope that there will be unanimity in support of this motion . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Bill Rompkey : 
honourable senators , I rise to speak on this motion for two main reasons . 
first , I want to support Senator Gauthier . 
senator Gauthier and I were both elected in 1972 . 
i simply want to support my colleague , the last remaining colleague in Parliament from the class of 1972 . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , I am sorry to interrupt you but it is six o ' clock . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
your Honour , I propose that we not see the clock . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Rompkey : 
it is not my intention to detain the house , honourable senators , but I will say a few words . 
i want to support Senator Gauthier and the personal and political courage which he shows today . 
my second reason for speaking arises from comments by Senator Fraser , given on another occasion , in another place . 
she said that this is not a francophone issue ; this is a Canadian issue . 
as a Newfoundlander , I come from a group of newer Canadians , in that we only joined this country in 1949 . 
then , as unilingual anglophones , we had to learn a lot about Canada . 
many of us still do not speak French . 
as a matter of fact , some of us do not even speak English all that well . 
we speak the language of Shakespeare . 
i can see Senator Cochrane admonishing me from her place . 
let me just say that we on the island and in Labrador speak a language which began in Shakespeare ' s time , in the 16 th century , and it has not changed a lot since then . 
we make no apologies for that . 
it is other people who have changed the English language , not us . 
the linguistic status of Ottawa is neither a francophone issue nor an anglophone issue . 
it is a Canadian issue . 
i stand in support of a bilingual capital because Ottawa is the capital of those who live in Labrador . 
as such , it should reflect the nature of this country . 
this provision is important . 
this capital city , where we all live and work , should reflect the bilingual nature of this country and the culture of which we are so proud . 
that is why I support this motion , honourable senators . 
hon. Joyce Fairbairn : 
honourable senators , I would not wish this moment to pass without joining with colleagues on both sides of the house to support this motion by my old friend Senator Jean - Robert Gauthier . 
senator Gauthier was put on earth for a moment like this . 
he has been a voice for fairness in this city , in this province and in this country for the many years that I have known him . 
in a moment like this , when we see an incomprehensible state of mind in the capital city of this province , it is very fortunate that there is such a person with the strength of character and passion of Senator Gauthier . 
he has once again led the forces of Canadianism and fairness and equality on this issue . 
it is very true that the linguistic status of Ottawa is a Canadian issue . 
you cannot go to any part of Canada without knowing that some of the most inspiring pioneers , no matter how far west or north or east you go , were people who brought the French language and the French culture into every region of our country . 
we are very proud of those pioneers in Alberta but they are , as my friend Senator Prud ' homme says , always struggling to retain their culture . 
the farther we go from the centre , often the harder the struggle becomes . 
this issue is a battleground . 
i am proud to stand beside my colleague Senator Gauthier on this question . 
there are people in Saint - Paul , in Lac La Biche , in Morinville and in St. Albert who are watching to see what will happen in Parliament on this issue , to see whether they count as full Canadians . 
of course , they do ! 
i say to Senator Gauthier , " Thank you . " 
i say to all honourable senators that this is a proud moment in the Senate when we can all stand together on an issue as fundamental to our country as this one . 
hon. Senators : 
hear , hear ! 
hon. Sharon Carstairs : 
honourable senators , in 1905 , after the birth of her seventeenth child , my grandmother , Sophie Leblanc Martel , left her small fishing village in Cape Breton and moved to Boston , Massachusetts . 
when she arrived there , she told her children they were no longer to speak French ; that they were now living in an English country and they were to learn and speak English . 
my mother was born , the eighteenth and last child , two years later . 
she never heard her mother speak French except when her mother said her prayers . 
i think my grandmother would be very happy to know that her grandchildren , at least some of us , came back to Canada , to a bilingual country . 
i think she would accept that the City of Ottawa , the capital city of this country , should be a bilingual city . 
i was raised to think , in the first instance , that I was Irish on one side and American on the other side until , one day , my mother arrived home with a piece of very old stained glass , patterned with a fleur - de - lys . 
it is now in my office in the East Block . 
my mother cleaned that glass and put it on a stand in the living room . 
then she announced to my father that his children were not just Irish ; her children were French - Canadians . 
hon. Francis William Mahovlich : 
honourable senators , in 1972 when Senator Rompkey and Senator Gauthier were appointed , I happened to be in Russia with a bilingual Canadian hockey team . 
we were very successful ; and 1972 was a very good year . 
i merely wanted to express my agreement with the remarks made by Senator Rompkey . 
hon. Fernand Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I wish to express my support for Senator Gauthier ' s motion . 
i thought it would be taken for granted that I would support that motion . 
of course I support it . 
it might often be taken for granted - I think many people take it for granted - that the national capital must be bilingual . 
when we are a minority , we often make the mistake of taking certain things for granted . 
the fact that we have to table a motion to ask that the national capital region be bilingual shows that we must always be vigilant . 
we must encourage people to respect both official languages of the country . 
i unconditionally and sincerely support this motion . 
hon. Marie - P . 
honourable senators , today we see the position the Senate occupies in our country . 
as several of our colleagues have so eloquently said , it is entirely fitting that we end 1999 with pride and a unanimous motion in principle . 
the Senate of Canada represents all minorities and professions , the full cultural diversity and resources of our country . 
last Tuesday , I expressed my surprise that there was an unwillingness to recognize the bilingual status of Canada ' s capital . 
a few days later , in the service of the country , as legislators representing Canadians , we rallied and spoke out with one voice , one heart and one sense of pride . 
all the teams that support us deserve our congratulations . 
hon. Louis J . Robichaud : 
honourable senators , I went from being disappointed and almost insulted , when the Government of Ontario decided that the national capital might not be bilingual to being delighted at what my colleagues in the Senate were saying about feeling offended because of the refusal to declare Ottawa , our nation ' s capital , officially bilingual . 
earlier , Senator Frank Mahovlich said that , in 1972 , an important event took place in Canada and in Moscow ; I was there too . 
that was when the Canadians showed their mastery in something dear to them - the sport of hockey . 
we also hold something else dear , and that is bilingualism . 
we would so like to see an end to these battles . 
we would so like not to have to fight to have bilingualism officially recognized . 
i did not intend to say anything at all . 
i was absolutely certain that the motion by Senator Jean - Robert Gauthier would be unanimously adopted . 
as was pointed out , I am one of the last in this millennium to speak . 
i am very clearly in favour of bilingualism . 
hon. Aur é lien Gill : 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
if no other senator wishes to speak , I will proceed . 
is it your pleasure , honourable senators , to adopt the motion ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
senator Kinsella : 
i would ask for agreement that the record show that this motion passed unanimously . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is it agreed , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
motion agreed to . 
Christmas Wishes 
hon. Mabel M. DeWare : 
honourable senators , on behalf of the official opposition , I wish to thank His Honour , the Table Officers and the pages for their support in this wonderful institution in which we work . 
i wish you and all honourable senators a joyous holiday season and extend our best wishes as we step into the new millennium . 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , I join my colleague opposite in wishing everyone a happy holiday season and all of the best in the next millennium , the 21 st century . 
i thank everyone here for their cooperation and assistance and the good service they have done to their country in this institution . 
adjournment 
leave having been given to revert to Government Notices of Motions : 
hon. Dan Hays ( Deputy Leader of the Government ) : 
honourable senators , with leave of the Senate and notwithstanding rule 58 ( 1 ) ( h ) , I move : 
that when the Senate adjourns today , it do stand adjourned until Tuesday , February 8 , 2000 , at 2 p.m. 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
is leave granted , honourable senators ? 
hon. Senators : 
agreed . 
the Hon. the Speaker : 
honourable senators , before I put the motion , I , too , wish to thank all Senate staff for the fine support . 
i wish everyone a very Merry Christmas and a very Happy New Year . 
this is an historic day , the last sitting of 1999 , the last sitting of this millennium . 
i wish you all the very best for the coming year . 
i regret that the Chief Justice had to leave , as we sat a little longer than anticipated , but I hope to see all of you in my chambers . 
motion agreed to . 
the Senate adjourned until Tuesday , February 8 , 2000 , at 2 p.m. 
